Four series of reactions were explored that are aimed at the development of a functional group chemistry at the sensitive bent metallocenes of the Group 4 metals. First, we have tested and employed the olefin metathesis reaction. Two [C5H4-(CH2)n-CH= CH2]2ZrCl2 complexes (with n=4 and n=1) were treated with the Cl2(PCy3)2 R=CHPh catalyst in dilute solution. Intramolecular metathesis took place readily with liberation of ethene to yield the corresponding ansa-metallocene complexes [C5H4- (CH2)n-CH=CH-(CH2) n-C5H4]ZrCl2 that were isolated in ca. 28% (n=4, trans-CH=CH-) or ca. 50% (n=1, cis-CH=CH-) yield. Intermolecular olefin metathesis could also be effected using either a first or a second generation Grubbs catalyst to metathetically couple a variety of (L)Cl2M(C5H4-CH2 CH=CH2)-type titanium or zirconium complexes to yield the respective dimetallic products. Alkenyl substituents were attached at the ligand stage at the indenyl 2-positions by means of a nickel-catalyzed cross-coupling reaction. Transmetallation eventually gave the bis(2-alkenylindenyl)ZrCl2 complexes. Photolysis of three examples of this type of complexes (with 1-alkenyl substituents being methyl, cyclohexyl, or phenyl) resulted in a very efficient intramolecular [2 + 2] cycloaddition to yield the respective substituted cyclobutylene-bridged ansa -metallocenes. These complexes were MAO activated to give very active homogeneous metallocene catalysts for, e.g., ethene/1-octene copolymerization. The corresponding (s-trans-butadiene)-ansa-zirconocene complexes feature a pronounced C-H/phenylene π-interaction that probably helps to stabilize the s-trans-diene complex relative to its s-cis-isomer. Deprotonation of 7-dialkylaminofulvenes provides an easy access to enamino-cyclopentadienides. Transmetallation under carefully controlled conditions gave the respective bis(enamino-C5H4) ZrCl2 complexes. Their treatment with a catalytic amount of a Lewis acid (TiCl4) or a Brønsted-acid ([HNMe2Ph+][BPh4-]) led to a rapid intramolecular Mannich-type carbon-carbon coupling reaction that gave novel, very rigid C3-bridged, -NR2 functionalized ansa-metallocene systems. The analogous, readily performed Mannich-coupling reaction starting from 1,1′-diacetylferrocene and a variety of secondary amines provided an interesting and useful novel entry to [3]ferrocenophane systems. Catalytic hydrogenation of the unsaturated bridge followed by additional functionalization opened a novel pathway to ferrocenophane-based chelate ligands (some optically active) for stereoselective catalytic transformations. Eventually, examples of direct attack of the electrophilic boranes B(C6F5) 3 or HB(C6F5)2, respectively, to the Cp rings of bis(cyclopentadienyl)zirconacyclopentadienes are described, leading to novel types of Cp-borylated Group 4 metallocene complexes. © 2004 Published by Elsevier B.V.
