The titanocene alkyne complex without any additional ligands Cp2Ti(Me3SiC≡CSiMe3) 1 and the zirconocene alkyne complexes free from stabilizing phosphine ligands Cp2Zr(L)(Me3SiC≡ CSiMe3) (L = THF 2, pyridine 3) as well as the metallacyclic complex Cp2Zr-O-CMe2-C(SiMe3)=C(SiMe3) 4 react with some substrates in an unusual manner depending on metals M, ligands L and the substituents R of the substrates. Also in some cases the competitive reaction of coupling of the complexed alkyne occurs. In this account all products without coupling of the silylalkyne are numbered, the data of detailed NMR studies and X-ray crystal structure analyses are given in the cited references. The reaction of "Cp2Zr" with benzophenone gives the ligand stabilized metallocene η2-ketone complex 5. With di(tert-butyl)acetylene-dicarboxylate a coupling of a C=C- and a C=O-ester group to 6 and with bis(trimethylsilyl)acetylenedicarboxylate an unusual 1,3-migration of a SiMe3 unit from an oxygen to a carbon atom yielding the dimeric complex 7 occurs. Ketimines react with metallocenes either to the ligand stabilized η2-complexes 8 or the derivatives bearing N-H functions to amido alkylideneamido complexes 9 and 10 by a hydrogen transfer reaction. Aldimines give the cyclic diamido complex 11 or in the case of a methyl group at the nitrogen under evolution of methane an unsaturated cyclic complex. Heterocyclic C=N systems, e.g. benzoxazoles or benzthiazoles, show a ring enlargement and a simultaneous coupling to 12 and 13 or, e.g. benzisoxazoles, yield without coupling the dimeric complex 14. Depending on metals, ligands, substituents and used stoichiometry the generated metallocenes "Cp2M" react with one equivalent of 1,4-disubstituted 1,3-butadiynes RC=C-C≡CR' to give five-membered metallacyclic cumulenes 15 and 16 or with a half equivalent of the diyne the bimetallic complexes 17 - 19. Two diyne molecules are coupled by "Cp2Ti" to yield a titanacyclopentadiene 20 in contrast to "Cp2Zr", which gives the seven-membered zirconacyclic cumulenes 21 and 22. Also a novel cleavage of the central C-C single bond of the butadiynes by the metallocene occurs yielding the homobimetallic, doubly σ,π-acetylide bridged complexes 23-26. The heterobimetallic complex 27 was obtained in the reactions of the metallacyclocumulens 15 with "Cp2Zr" or 16 with "Cp2Ti". Complexes (Ph3P)2Ni(η2-RC≡C-C≡CR') gives with "Cp2Ti" the Ni(0) complexed titanacyclocumulene 28 or with "Cp2M" the heterobimetallic σ,π-acatylide-bridged complexes 29 -31. The metallocene units interact with one equivalent of an alkynylsilane carrying Si-H groups (RC≡CSiMe2H) to yield trans-coordinated alkyne complexes with strong Si-H-M interactions like 32, which at low temperatures is in agreement with the description on the way to a novel hydrido η3-silaallenyl complex. Two molecules of the alkynylsilane are coupled to metallacyclopentadienes without Si-H-M interactions (e.g. 33).
