Photolysis of diphenylzirconocene (5) at low temperature (-50 °C) in the presence of the isomerically pure dienes (Z,Z)- and (Z,E)-2,4-hexadiene (8a) and (Z,Z)- and (Z,E)-1,4-diphenylbutadiene (8b), respectively, leads to the stereospecific formation of the corresponding (s-trans-η4-conjugated diene)zirconocene complexes 1a-ZZ, 1a-ZE, 1b-ZZ, and 1b-ZE. Upon thermolysis, 1a-ZZ (τ1/2≈ 25 min at -25 °C) first rearranges to give 1a-ZE exclusively, which consecutively rearranges to a thermodynamic 60/40 mixture of 1 a EE/3a-EE at higher temperature (+25 °C). Similarly, 1b-ZE undergoes a thermally induced geometrical isomerization at +35 °C to form 1b-EE/3b-EE (95/5). The same product mixture is obtained directly from 1b-ZZ at +60 °C. The observed stepwise loss of the stereochemical information at the terminal carbon centers of the conjugated diene ligands of 1 indicates a rearrangement process proceeding through a π-allyl-type intermediate (4). This interpretation is supported by the result of an extended Hückel calculation: an approximate transition state (10a') for a related isomerization process with an unsubstituted butadiene system can be reached by rotating this ligand around a Zr-Cterm bond (7°), lifting the exposed CH2 group by 50°, and rotating it 90°. A barrier of 25 kcal/mol was computed. The orbitals of 10a are in agreement with the formulation of an allyl complex. A low-lying LUMO predominantly localized at the exposed CH2 moiety indicates carbenium ion character at this carbon. Terminal π-donor substituents at the butadiene ligand cause a drop of the rearrangement barrier to 12 kcal/mol, which can be explained by means of delocalization of carbenium p orbital character into filled wave functions of the π-donor residue. Stereochemistry and calculations have thus revealed a third general mechanistic pathway for an intramolecular diene transition-metal complex isomerization: rearrangement through π-allyl-type intermediates 4 can be of importance in addition to the established diene rotation and topomerization mechanisms. © 1985, American Chemical Society. All rights reserved.
