The discovery by Kubas et al.1 of the coordination of an intact dihydrogen molecule to transition metals to form a dihydrogen σ-complex 1 was one of the most exciting and important discoveries of the late 20th century.2-4 This discovery had a significant influence on the study of activation of small molecules by metal centers and led to an impressive development of the general field of nonclassical complexes.5 Neglecting the vast class of compounds with delocalized π-bonds, by nonclassical we understand a compound in which bonding between elements X and Y cannot be presented by a single Lewis structure. Broadly speaking, a nonclassical bond is one that includes a significant delocalization of σ-bonds over three or more centers. The concept of 3 center-2 electron (3c-2e) bonds developed for the earlier examples of trihydrogen cation H3+ (2), methonium cation CH5+ (3) (observed in the gas phase in mass-spectral experiments), and polyboranes 4 serves well to illustrate this point. In nonclassical complexes, one or several metal-ligand and/or ligand-ligand bonds are involved in nonclassical bonding. The terms secondary interactions and weak interactions are also used occasionally to describe this phenomenon.5 Apart from its obvious aesthetic beauty, the discovery of H-H σ-bond coordination to metals1 and the almost simultaneous formulation of C-H-M agostic bonding (as schematically shown in 5)6,7 were quickly realized to be highly relevant to transition metal activation of inert bonds, with all the important implications for catalysis.3,4,6-9{A figure is presented}. Curiously enough, although the element silicon is only second to hydrogen in the number of known nonclassical complexes, it was the first one for which the idea of nonclassical Si...H interaction was clearly put forward for the binuclear silane σ-complex 6 almost 35 years ago.10,11 The resurgence of interest in silane σ-complexes 7 in the early 1980s resulted in a significant advance in our understanding of the Si-H bond activation, which is important for the investigation of various hydrosilation reactions. Although silicon is a heavier analog of carbon, the Si-H bond complexation to metals has a much closer resemblance to H-H bond coordination rather than to C-H bond complexation.2 However, the presence of substituents at silicon with different electronic and steric properties, a feature absent for hydrogen, has a significant impact not only on the strength of Si-H interaction but also on the type of nonclassical complex formed. Thus, a class of agostic Si-H...M complexes 8, which is related to 7 but differs from it in the presence of an additional bridge between the metal and interacting silicon atom, has been discovered. The earlier work and subsequent development of this field have been well summarized in a monograph2 and a series of review articles.3,4,8,11-15. More recently, several new families of compounds have been found that exhibit bonding features different from what is normally observed in complexes 7 and 8.16,17 These new classes can be classified as compounds with interligand hypervalent interactions (IHI) Si-H, as schematically shown in 9, and complexes with multiple hydride-silicon interactions like in 10, where the dotted line represents a nonclassical interaction between the silicon atoms and hydride ligands.16-20 In contrast to σ-complexes 7 with three-center bonds, in compounds 9 and 10 the nonclassical bonding is essentially delocalized over four and more centers. Bonding such as in 9 and 10 requires a specific conformation of the complex and exhibits very different dependence of bond lengths and spectroscopic features on the nature of substituents at silicon than in silane σ-complexes 7. That is, groups X and H should be trans, the M-Si bond is shortened, and the electron-withdrawing groups X on silicon strengthen the interaction. This work and some new findings in the field of agostic complexes 8 led to the refinement of the original bonding schemes developed for nonclassical complexes with Si-H interaction. The intent of the current account is to discuss the general features and ideas of nonclassical Si-H interactions in transition metal complexes and to review the recent experimental and theoretical achievements of this field. Some earlier work is included and discussed if there is new relevant experimental and/or theoretical information, or to illustrate the discussion of general aspects. Different types of nonclassical bonding are treated separately. Section II highlights the basic features of the chemistry of silane σ-complexes 7 and the related agostic complexes 8, and discusses the recent advances in this field. Next, Section III is dedicated to compounds with interligand hypervalent Si-H interactions 9, finally, Section IV describes the chemistry of polyhydride compounds like 10 with multiple hydride-silicon interactions. In this review, as is common in the literature, the nonclassical compounds are often written in the ηm-form ( m {greater than or slanted equal to} 2 ), i.e. [ M ( η2 - HSiR3 ) Ln ] ( m = 2 ) . Such an η2-designation is based on the important phenomenological feature that both the hydrogen and silicon atoms, albeit still bound to each other, have some kind of a bond to the metal. As such, this designation does not tell us anything about the origin of the interaction and is entirely ambiguous. However, the absence, until recently, of any kind of interligand Si-H bonding different from the complexation of silane σ-bonds to metals, leads sometimes to incorrect mixing up of the general η2-form with σ-complexes, which constitute only one type of nonclassical complexes.{A figure is presented}. © 2005 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
