© 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.There is no evidence that titanium is an essential element for humans or other animals. Titanium belongs to the first transition group of the periodic table of the elements; its chemical behavior is similar to that of silicon and zirconium. Although titanium compounds are, in general, absorbed poorly by ingestion and inhalation, titanium still can be detected in the blood, brain, and parenchymatous organs of individuals in the general population, with the highest concentrations being found in the hilar lymph nodes and the lungs. Titanium is excreted in the urine; information on other routes of excretion is lacking.Studies on titanium alloys used in implants and titanium compounds. -such as its salicylate, oxide, and tannate derivatives-. -used in cosmetics and pharmaceuticals have not indicated any significant local effects on tissues, although under certain circumstances inflammatory reactions and systemic effects have been observed. Thus, titanium cannot always be considered as inert and biocompatible, as was once believed. Titanium tetrachloride, a strong irritant to mucous membranes and the eyes, can cause skin burns through accidental exposure. Experimental animal studies, clinical studies, and some epidemiological surveys have indicated that titanium dioxide is generally biologically inert, but cases of adverse reactions have been reported. In experimental studies on animals, titanium carbide, hydride, nitride, and boride have exhibited slight fibrogenic activity. Artificial fibers. -such as potassium octatitanate and titanium phosphate fibers. -possess fibrogenic properties.Bronchoalveolar lavage cells from rats instilled endotracheally with TiO2 particles induce Hrpt gene mutations in rat alveolar cells in vitro. Intramuscular injections of powdered titanium metal have induced fibrosarcomas and lymphosarcomas in rats; similarly, the organotitanium compound titanocene has induced fibrosarcomas in rats. Several epidemiological studies have suggested that TiO2 dust has no carcinogenic effect on human lungs. The International Agency for Research on Cancer has listed titanium dioxide in Group 2B. There is sufficient evidence from experimental animal studies to suggest the carcinogenicity of TiO2, but no adequate evidence exists for the carcinogenicity of titanium oxide in humans. A soluble titanate given to rats in their drinking water was found to disturb their reproduction in a three-generation study.Environmental pollution caused by the use of titanium nanoparticles (TNPs) has recently become important, and is increasing. Although a few epidemiological studies have shown no increased risk of respiratory cancer, further evaluation on toxicity of TNPs needs to be performed.
