this paper represents an initial analysis of unsteady gaseous flows in a rectangular microchannel under usual pressure and temperature conditions . the effect of depth and aspect ratios of the cross-section is investigated . with most fluid - based mechanical microsystems of small internal dimensions and subject to normal pressure and temperature conditions , flow is rarefied with slip at the walls . this flow is then modeled by the navier - stokes equations combined with slip and temperature jump conditions at the walls . these conditions are represented by maxwell - smoluchowski first order equations . by concentrating essentially on the pulsed sinusoidal regime , it is shown that the instantaneous flow rate amplitude , as well as the band pass of the microchannel are underestimated when slip at the walls is not taken into account . the frequency response of two microchannels connected in series with different cross-sectional areas is also studied . finally , the proposed model can serve as a tool giving information about the current feasibilities of pressure sensors for the measurement of the dynamic characteristics of gaseous flows in microchannels . 
presented is an analytical description of the rapid two dimensional shearing flow of granular materials which results in expressions for the normal as well as the shear stress in terms of various flow parameters . the rapid flow regime here is in accord with the grain - inertia - dominated flow of granular materials as described by bagnold . both gradients of velocity and microrotation of grains are taken into account and the final constitutive equations resemble those of a non-Newtonian microfluid for which the stresses depend on the square of the velocity gradients , the square of microrotation gradients , as well as the product of velocity gradients and microrotation gradients . 
there are currently several techniques available for assessing cell deformability . however , two techniques dominate hemorheological research in the single cell flow regime , namely , micropipette aspiration and filtration . A microfluidic device has been developed which can function either as an array of micropipettes or a two dimensional filter matrix . this device is useful for providing steady state analysis of flowing cells . 
experimental investigation , numerical simulation and analytical modelling of forced convection are presented . an electrocaloric mass - flow sensor is the object of investigations . the convective heat lost and the influence of the flow over the temperature field have been measured and calculated . the influence of flow regimes over forced convection in a microfluid system is shown . applications and further work are discussed at the end of the paper . 
As the field of microfluidics continues to grow , it is becoming increasingly important to understand the mechanisms involved with heat transfer in two - phase flow through microgeometries . this importance is reiterated by the increasing number of applications which use phase change as the principal mechanism to conduct or remove heat . the purpose of this study was to investigate fluid mechanic and heat transfer characteristics of two - phase two - component flow in rectangular microchannels . experiments were conducted using rectangular aluminum channels with hydraulic diameters ranging between <nUm> mm and <nUm> mm and aspect ratios which varied from <nUm> to <nUm> . both single- and two - phase tests yielded excellent correlations of the friction factor . reynolds number and the combination of reynolds number and prandtl number were the dominant parameters in the prediction of pressure drop and heat transfer rate , respectively . the pressure drop predictions , based on available semi-empirical relations for two - phase flows , were shown to substantially over predict the measured pressure drop . other findings showed that for single - phase flow , the transition from laminar to turbulent regimes of the friction factor was suppressed as the channel hydraulic diameter decreased . two - phase friction factor data indicated a definite transition from laminar to turbulent regimes at a reynolds number of <nUm> for all channel configurations tested . it is believed that the transition was due to the intense pressure fluctuations associated with two - phase flows . In both single- and two - phase experiments , nusselt number data exhibited a trend similar to the macroscale turbulent regime correlations ; however , the data were somewhat less than the macroscale predictions . In contrast to the friction factor data , both single - and two - phase nusselt number data suggested no change in flow regimes occurred . 
miniaturized fluid systems have emerged in recent years as a serious approach to improved performance and new functionality in the bioanalysis arena . several important scaling issues are important in the design of fluid systems at the micro scale including surface to volume ratio , flow regime ( reynolds number ) and connection and packaging issues . we have developed two microfluidic systems including an integrated capillary electrophoresis and nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy system and a system for the transport and handling of mammalian embryos . both glass and polyimide - based systems were built to investigate the integration of capillary electrophoresis ( CE ) with nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy ( NMR ) . linewidths of <nUm> Hz have been demonstrated in the system . we have also designed , built , and tested a micro fluidic system capable of transporting individual , pre-implantation mouse embryos through a network of channels to selected locations . the flow of buffer causes the embryos to roll down the channels . embryos can be spatially retained and then released or moved to a new location via the manipulation of flows . typical embryo velocities of <nUm> mm / s were observed for <nUm> mm / s center line fluid velocities . 
A simple but fairly accurate flow model created on an EXCEL spreadsheet is presented . the model is useful for predicting subsonic glass flows in the viscous - laminar regime , the transition regime , and the molecular flow regime . 
A microchemical device has been built in silicon and glass by using microfabrication methods including deep - reactive - ion etch technology , photolithography , and multiple wafer bonding . the microchemical system consists of a microfluidic distribution manifold , a microchannel array , and a 25-mm microfilter for immobilizing solid particulate material within the reactor chip and carrying out different heterogeneous chemistries . multiple reagent streams ( specifically , gas and liquid streams ) are mixed on - chip , and the fluid streams are brought into contact by a series of interleaved , high-aspect-ratio inlet channels . these inlet channels deliver the reactants continuously and cocurrently to <nUm> reactor chambers containing standard catalytic particles . the performance of the microfabricated " packed - bed " reactor is compared to that of traditional multiphase packed - bed reactors in terms of fluid flow regimes , pressure drop , and mass transfer . the hydrogenation of cyclohexene is used as a model reaction to measure the mass transfer resistances . overall mass transfer coefficients ( KLa ) are measured to range from <nUm> to <nUm> s-1-nearly <nUm> orders of magnitude larger than values reported in the literature for standard laboratory - scale reactors . 
emerging microfluidic systems have spurred an interest in the study of electrokinetic flow phenomena in complex geometries and a variety of flow conditions . this paper presents an analysis of the effects of fluid inertia and pressure on the velocity and vorticity field of electroosmotic flows . In typical on - chip electrokinetics applications , the flow field can be separated into an inner flow region dominated by viscous and electrostatic forces and an outer flow region dominated by inertial and pressure forces . these two regions are separated by a slip velocity condition determined by the helmholtz - smoulochowski equation . the validity of this assumption is investigated by analyzing the velocity field in a pressure - driven , two - dimensional flow channel with an impulsively started electric field . the regime for which the inner / outer flow model is valid is described in terms of nondimensional parameters derived from this example problem . next , the inertial forces , surface conditions , and pressure - gradient conditions for a full - field similarity between the electric and velocity fields in electroosmotic flows are discussed . A sufficient set of conditions for this similarity to hold in arbitrarily shaped , insulating wall microchannels is the following : uniform surface charge , low reynolds number , low reynolds and strouhal number product , uniform fluid properties , and zero pressure differences between inlets and outlets . last , simple relations describing the generation of vorticity in electroosmotic flow are derived using a wall - local , streamline coordinate system . 
gaseous flows in microfluidic devices are often characterized by relatively high knudsen numbers . for such flows , the continuum approximation is not valid , and direct simulation monte carlo ( DSMC ) may be used to find an appropriate solution . for low - velocity flows , where the fluid velocity is much smaller than the mean molecular velocity , large statistical fluctuations in the solution mean that the features of the flow may be obscured by noise in the solution . the use of a high - order , nonlinear monotone convection algorithm , flux - corrected transport ( FCT ) , as a filter to extract the solution from the noisy DSMC calculation is described . the diffusion , antidiffusion , and flux - limiting properties of FCT are discussed in terms of their filtering properties . the effects of filtering with FCT are demonstrated for a series of test problems , including a square wave with superimposed random noise , and low- and high - velocity and low- and high-Knudsen-number microchannel flows . it is shown that FCT filtering removes high - frequency statistical fluctuations and can extract a solution from a noisy DSMC calculation when the flow velocity is much less than the molecular thermal velocity and when the ratio of real to simulated particles is relatively high . although the application described has been limited to microflows , this filter has significant potential for a wide variety of DSMC problems used in physical regimes where statistical noise must be eliminated . because it is a postprocessing operation and does not affect the DSMC calculation as it is running , filtering can be applied to any DSMC solution . this includes calculations with complex geometries , the presence of many interacting species with chemical reactions , varied and complicated boundary conditions , and time - dependent solutions . 
numerical simulation results for pure electroosmotic and combined electroosmotic / pressure driven stokes flows are presented in the cross-flow and y-split junctions . the numerical algorithm is based on a mixed structured / unstructured spectral element formulation , which results in high - order accurate resolution of thin electric double layers with discretization flexibility for complex engineering geometries . the results for pure electroosmotic flows in cross-flow junctions under multiple electric fields show similarities between the electric and velocity fields . the combined electroosmotic / pressure driven flows are also simulated by regulating the flowrate in different branches of the cross-flow junctions . flow control in the stokes flow regime is shown to have linear dependence on the magnitude of the externally applied electric field , both for pure electroosmotic and combined flows . this linear behavior enables utilization of electroosmotic forces as nonmechanical means of flow control for microfluidic applications . 
surface - enhanced resonance raman scattering ( SERRS ) of a model derivative of TNT was detected using a microflow cell designed within the framework of the lab - on - a - chip concept , using only the analyte and readily available reagents . the SERRS substrate , silver colloid , was prepared in situ , on - chip , by borohydride reduction of silver nitrate . the silver colloid was imaged within the chip using a white light microscope in either transmission or , due to the high reflectivity of the colloid , reflection mode . A fine stream of colloid ∼ <nUm> mm in width was formed in a 250-mm-wide channel at the point where the colloid preparation reagents met . the chip was designed to produce a concentrated stream of colloid within a laminar regime , such that particles did not readily disperse into the fluid . one result of this was to reduce the effective volume of analysis . attempts to deliberately disrupt this stream with microstructured pillars , fabricated in the fluidic channels , were unsuccessful . the chip was also designed to have the appropriate dimensions for detection using a modem raman microscope system , which collects scattering from a very small volume . A dye derived from TNT was used as a model analyte . quantitative behavior was obtained over <nUm> orders of magnitude with a detection limit of <nUm> fmol . this performance is between <nUm> and <nUm> orders of magnitude better than that achieved using a macroflow SERRS cell . the technique has the added advantage that both reagent consumption and effluent production are greatly reduced , leading to reduced operating costs and a decreased environmental impact . 
electroosmotic flow in microfluidic systems is limited to the low reynolds number regime . As a result species mixing in electroosmotic flow systems is inherently diffusion dominated , requiring both a long mixing channel and retention time to attain a homogeneous solution . recent studies have shown that the introduction of oppositely charged surface heterogeneities to microchannel walls can result in regions of localized flow circulation within the bulk flow . In this study we seek to investigate these circulation regions , through 3D finite - element based numerical simulations , and then use them as a method of enhancing species mixing in a t-shaped micromixer . while all cases of surface heterogeneity are shown to enhance mixing efficiency , greater improvement is found when both the size of the heterogeneous region and the degree of heterogeneity ( i.e. , the difference between the heterogeneous and homogeneous z-potentials ) are increased . In some cases the presence of heterogeneous regions is shown to reduce the required mixing channel length by as much as <nUm> % . 
we report distinct growth regimes of hollow silica fibers formed by hydrodynamic injection of cupric sulfate into silicate solution . the tubes grow either steadily along a continuous jet of buoyant solution or through relaxation oscillations that are governed by chemo - mechanical processes . the dependence of the oscillation period on flow rate and copper concentration is explained in the framework of a simple model . tailored flow patterns allow the directional control of the tubes and their use as miniature connectors . our findings are applicable to the understanding of chemical gardens , promise a wealth of nonlinear phenomena , and offer possible applications in microfluidics . 
the chemical stability of the vanadomolybdophosphoric acid method for phosphate determination in a microfluidic manifold is described . the reagent lifetime has been shown to extend to more than <nUm> year . A stopped flow regime has been implemented , which enabled a very simple microfluidic manifold design to be employed , and has the added advantages of low reagent consumption coupled with less waste generation and access to the complete reaction profile in the optical cuvette on the microfluidic chip . optical detection was achieved with an UV - LED , integrated into the microfluidic chip holder , coupled to a portable spectrometer via an optical fibre . the manifold includes integration of reagent and sample introduction inlets , a mixing channel and an optical cuvette of <nUm> mm path length . two reagent batches were prepared ( december <nUm> and april <nUm> ) and were shown to still be highly comparable after <nUm> year in storage . multiple calibrations have been performed on the microfluidic system over a 12-month period showing only minimal loss in performance and a standard orthophosphate - containing sample was analysed in the microfluidic manifold on a weekly basis with a relative standard deviation of < <nUm> % . 
the in-plane digital sorting of the multiphase microfluid flow is presented in the laminar flow regime . it is achieved by manipulating the pitch of alternate microfluid flow and delay distance resulting from passing through special microchannels . the theoretical analysis derives delay distance . for experimental evaluation , a characteristic in-plane microchannel is fabricated by using micromachining . the pitch of the alternate microfluid flow is controlled . digital sorting is demonstrated by using the immiscible droplet phase fluids . also , the dynamic behavior of the droplet phase microfluids is measured by the particle image velocimetry ( micro-PIV ) and characterized qualitatively and qualitatively . 
the design and calculation of micro mixers is done by conventional analytical and numerical calculations . due to the small dimensions , laminar flow is expected and the mass transfer is supposed to be dominated by diffusion . A detailed CFD - study by CFDRC - ACE+ of simple static mixers shows a deviation from strictly laminar flow in a wide range of Re numbers and channel dimensions . the static mixers under test have a T-Profile with rectangular cross sections and characteristic dimensions of <nUm> to <nUm> mm . the mean flow velocity is varied from <nUm> m / s to <nUm> m / s , which are typical values for chemical and biological applications , chemical analysis , and microfluidics with acceptable pressure losses . with increasing flow velocity and increasing Re numbers the flow starts to develop a vortex at the entrance of the mixing channel . with further increasing velocity the flow tends to instabilities , which causes the break up of the flow symmetry . with the onset of the vortex formation and with the occurrence of the flow instabilities the mass transfer is enhanced by the exchange of fluid elements . the laminar diffusion model can not describe this mixing effect . A simple analytical model for first calculations is proposed . 
we are developing hollow fiber - based specific antibody filters ( SAFs ) that selectively remove antibodies of a given specificity directly from whole blood , without separation of the plasma and cellular blood components and with minimal removal of plasma proteins other than the targeted pathogenic antibodies . A principal goal of our research is to identify the primary mechanisms that control antibody transport within the SAF and to use this information to guide the choice of design and operational parameters that maximize the SAF - based antibody removal rate . In this study , we formulated a simple mathematical model of SAF - based antibody removal and performed in vitro antibody removal experiments to test key predictions of the model . our model revealed three antibody transport regimes , defined by the magnitude of the damkohler number Da ( characteristic antibody - binding rate / characteristic antibody diffusion rate ) : reaction - limited ( Da ≤ <nUm> ) , intermediate ( <nUm> < Da < <nUm> ) , and diffusion - limited ( Da ≥ <nUm> ) . for a given SAF geometry , blood flow rate , and antibody diffusivity , the highest antibody removal rate was predicted for diffusion - limited antibody transport . additionally , for diffusion - limited antibody transport the predicted antibody removal rate was independent of the antibody - binding rate and hence was the same for any antibody - antigen system and for any patient within one antibody - antigen system . using SAF prototypes containing immobilized bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) , we measured anti-BSA removal rates consistent with transport in the intermediate regime ( Da ∼ <nUm> ) . we concluded that initial SAF development work should focus on achieving diffusion - limited antibody transport by maximizing the SAF antibody - binding capacity ( hence maximizing the characteristic antibody - binding rate ) . if diffusion - limited antibody transport is achieved , the antibody removal rate may be raised further by increasing the number and length of the SAF fibers and by increasing the blood flow rate through the SAF . 
monolithic microfluidic reactors for the safe , expedient , and continuous synthesis of products involving unstable intermediates were fabricated and assessed . the formation of diazonium salts in anhydrous conditions and their subsequent in situ chlorination within microfiuidic channels under hydrodynamic pumping regimes is presented . significant enhancements in yield were observed due to enhanced heat and mass transfer in microfluidic systems . analysis performed using off - line GC and GC-MS was compared with on - line , on - chip raman spectroscopy for the direct determination of analytes . 
the relevance and magnitude of an electroosmotic perfusion mechanism in electrochromatography is analyzed . to systemize our studies we first considered the transport of an electroneutral and nonadsorbing tracer . based on the refractive index matching in a microfluidic setup containing fixed spherical porous particles , we conducted a quantitative analysis in real time of the spatio-temporal distribution of fluorescent tracer molecules during their uptake by ( and a release from ) single particles using confocal laser scanning microscopy . even under conditions of a significant electrical double layer overlap the intraparticle electroosmotic flow produces due to its unidirectional nature and in striking contrast to the symmetric ( spherical ) distributions typical for purely diffusive transport strongly asymmetric concentration profiles inside spherical particles as the locally charged pore liquid begins to respond to the externally applied electrical field . the profiles retain an axisymmetric nature , i.e. , rotational symmetry with respect to the field direction . results of our measurements could be successfully interpreted and further analyzed by a compact mathematical model . intraparticle peclet numbers of up to <nUm> have been realized and found to significantly enhance the mass transport on particle scale towards the convection - dominated regime when compared to a conventional ( diffusion - limited ) kinetics . 
microsystems for the transport of gas are used in various fields . A precise measurement of the encountered microflows is necessary , in order to valid one model or the other for the boundary conditions , notably in the slip - flow regime , as well as to test new microsystems . In this paper , a new experimental setup is described . its main advantage , compared with the setups presented in the literature , is the simultaneous double measurement of the flow , upstream and downstream from the microsystem . this double measurement points out several technical difficulties , which are not detectable by conventional devices . our first experimental data , relative to circular microtubes , about a few tenths of microns in diameter , are presented and discussed . 
A simple colorimetric technique is implemented in a polymer microfluidic manifold . the simple chemistry aids an uncomplicated microchannel design , which is fabricated by CO2 laser ablation . issues such as bonding of multiple layers , alignment of micro-fabricated structures and integration of optical components are addressed . A demonstration of a stopped flow regime in the microfluidic manifold is also presented . 
the objective of the present paper is to provide a general overview of the research carried out so far in single - phase heat transfer and flow in capillary ( micro ) pipes . laminar flow and laminar - to - turbulent flow transition are analyzed in detail in order to clarify the discrepancies among the results obtained by different researchers . experiments performed in the ENEA laboratory indicate that in laminar flow regime the friction factor is in good agreement with the hagen - poiseuille theory for reynolds number below 600-800 . for higher values of reynolds number , experimental data depart from the hagen - poiseuille law to the side of higher f values . the transition from laminar - to - turbulent flow occurs for reynolds number in the range 1800-2500 . heat transfer experiments show that heat transfer correlations in laminar and turbulent regimes , developed for conventional ( macro ) tubes , are not properly adequate for heat transfer rate prediction in microtubes . 
the mixing of analytes and reagents for a biological or chemical lab - on - a - chip is an important , yet difficult , microfluidic operation . As volumes approach the sub-nanoliter regime , the mixing of liquids is hindered by laminar flow conditions . an electrowetting - based linear - array droplet mixer has previously been reported . however , fixed geometric parameters and the presence of flow reversibility have prevented even faster droplet mixing times . In this paper , we study the effects of varying droplet aspect ratios ( height : diameter ) on linear - array droplet mixers , and propose mixing strategies applicable for both high and low aspect ratio systems . an optimal aspect ratio for four electrode linear - array mixing was found to be <nUm> , with a mixing time of <nUm> seconds . mixing times were further reduced at this ratio to less than three seconds using a two - dimensional array mixer , which eliminates the effects of flow reversibility . for lower aspect ratio ( ≤ <nUm> ) systems , we present a split - and - merge mixer that takes advantage of the ability to perform droplet splitting at these ratios , resulting in a mixing time of less than two seconds . 
the behavior of an immiscible binary AB fluid flowing through a three - dimensional chemically patterned microchannel was investigated using computer simulations . the microchannel was decorated with chemically distinct patterns on the top and bottom substrates of the channel . results showed that in the intermediate velocity regime , a coupling between thermodynamic interactions and the imposed flow field gave rise to a rich interfacial behavior between the A and B fluids . 
the wetting of microstructured surfaces is studied both experimentally and theoretically . even relatively simple surface topographies such as grooves with rectangular cross section exhibit a large variety of different wetting morphologies as observed by atomic force microscopy . this polymorphism arises from liquid wedge formation along the groove corners and from contact line pinning along the groove edges . A global morphology diagram is derived that depends only on two system parameters : ( i ) the aspect ratio of the groove geometry and ( ii ) the contact angle of the underlying substrate material . for microfluidics , the most interesting shape regimes involve extended liquid filaments , which can grow and shrink in length while their cross section stays essentially constant thus , any method by which one can vary the contact angle can be used to switch the length of the filament , as is demonstrated in the context of electrowetting . 
A three - dimensional analysis is presented of the stokes flow , adjacent to a brinkman half - space , that is induced or altered by the presence of a sphere in the flow field that ( a ) translates uniformly without rotating , ( b ) rotates uniformly without translating , or ( c ) is fixed in a shear flow that is uniform in the far field . the linear superposition of these three flow regimes is also considered for the special case of the free motion of a neutrally buoyant sphere . exact solutions to the momentum equations are obtained in terms of infinite series expansions in the stokes - flow region and in terms of integral transforms in the brinkman medium . attention is focused on the approach to the asymptotic limit as the ratio of newtonian- to darcy - drag forces vanishes . from the leading - order asymptotic approximations , implicit recursion relations are derived to determine the coefficients in the series solutions such that those solutions exactly satisfy the boundary and interfacial conditions as well as the continuity equations in both the stokes - flow and brinkman regions . for each of the three flow regimes considered , results are presented in terms of the drag force on the sphere and torque about the sphere centre as a function of the dimensionless separation distance between the sphere and the interfacial plane for several small values of the dimensionless hydraulic permeability of the brinkman medium . finally , the free motion of a neutrally buoyant sphere is found by requiring that the net hydrodynamic drag force and torque acting on the sphere vanish . results for this case are presented in terms of the dimensionless translational and rotational speeds of the sphere as a function of the dimensionless separation distance for several small values of the dimensionless hydraulic permeability . the work is motivated by its potential application as an analytical tool in the study of near - wall microfluidics in the vicinity of the glycocalyx surface layer on vascular endothelium and in microelectromechanical systems devices where charged macromolecules may become adsorbed to microchannel walls . 
In this paper , a novel mathematical approach is devised to analyze the flow of blood from a droplet into a microcapillary channel . special attention is devoted to estimate the effects of variable hydraulic resistance over different flow regimes , influence of suspended RBC particulates on the non-Newtonian flow characteristics and implications of a dynamically - evolving contact angle . flow characteristics depicting advancement of the fluid within the microfluidic channel turn out to be typically non-linear , as per relative instantaneous strengths of the capillary forces and viscous resistances . it is found that the greater the ' pseudoplasticity ' of the blood , the weaker the retarding shear forces . the driving forces , on the other hand , become stronger with time , on account of a reduction of contact angle with a decrease of blood flow velocity , although this strengthening is less prominent for blood samples with greater ' pseudoplasticity ' . it is revealed that RBCs suspended in blood samples have a strong influence on the effective blood viscosity , and consequently , may drive the fluid significantly faster into the microchannel , especially when the characteristic length scales of the suspensions approach the hydraulic radius of the channel . 
it is widely predicted that various aspects of nanotechnology applied to microstructure technology will find increasing use in biotechnology and medicine and result in a more widespread use of such ideas . thus microfluidics chips serve as platforms in nanobiotechnology and as an interface for users of the technology while nanotechnology can expand the range of functions available using biochips . examples include nanoparticles , nanobarcodes , nanopores , molecular imprint technology and nano-coatings . before such concepts can be fully exploited , further development work is necessary in terms of flow behaviour and mass - transport in these very small structures . As flow cross-sections decrease , a drastic chahge in hydrodynamic regime is observed , including the fact that the cross-section of a micro-channel is dimensionally of the same order as the boundary layer thickness found in macroscopic conditions . 
In this study , a novel method for the one - step fabrication of stacked hydrogel microstructures using a microfluidic mold is presented . the fabrication of these structures takes advantage of the laminar flow regime in microfluidic devices , limiting the mixing of polymer precursor solutions . to create multilayered hydrogel structures , microfluidic devices were rotated <nUm> ° from the traditional xy axes and sealed with a cover slip . two discreet fluidic regions form in the channels , resulting in the multilayered hydrogel upon UV polymerization . multilayered patterned poly(ethylene glycol ) hydrogel arrays ( <nUm> mm tall , <nUm> mm wide ) containing fluorescent dyes , fluorescein isothiocyanate , and tetramethylrhodamine isothiocyanate were created for imaging purposes . additionally , this method was used to generate hydrogel layers containing murine fibroblasts and macrophages . the cell adhesion promoter , RGD , was added to hydrogel precursor solution to enhance fibroblast cell spreading within the hydrogel matrix in one layer , but not the other . we were able to successfully generate patterns of hydrogels containing multiple phenotypes by using this technique . 
the majority of carbon nanotubes ' synthesis processes occur in the presence of fluid ( liquid , gas , plasma , or multi-phase flow ) that may function as a carrier of catalyst particles , feedstock of carbon , and the heating or cooling agent . the fluid motion defines the temperature of catalyst particles and the local chemical composition of the fluid that determines the success of synthesis of high - purity nanotubes . In this review paper , the laser ablation process , high - pressure carbon oxide process , and chemical vapor deposition process are considered from the prospective of fluid dynamics modeling . the multi-model approach should be used for concurrent rendering of different areas of computational domain by different models and / or different time steps for the same model . for multiple plume ejection in laser ablation , the near - target area could be rendered by molecular dynamics approach whereas continuous gas dynamics algorithms should be employed to simulate plume dynamics of previously ejected plumes apart of the target . such an approach combines continuous mechanics of multi-species flow of feedstock gas or plume ; micro-fluidic flow model that is needed to find heat and mass transfer rate to catalysts in presence of individual nanotubes in close proximity to each other ; and molecular dynamics of evaporation and ejection of plume in laser ablation . 
microreactors incorporating thin film resistive heating elements for continuous flow organic synthesis are presented . internal thermal conditions were monitored in real time using reflectance spectra of temperature sensitive thermochromic liquid crystals ( TLC ) in a collateral microfluidic network . to demonstrate the precise temperature control provided by this method , the thermal optimisation of the reimer - tiemann formylation of b-naphthol was performed under hydrodynamic pumping regimes . 
decreasing the reynolds number of microfluidic no-moving-part flow control valves considerably below the usual operating range leads to a distinct " subdynamic " regime of viscosity - dominated flow , usually entered through a clearly defined transition . In this regime , the dynamic effects on which the operation of large - scale no-moving-part fluidic valves is based , cease to be useful , but fluid may be driven through the valve ( and any connected load ) by an applied pressure difference , maintained by an external pressure regulator . reynolds number ceases to characterize the valve operation , but the driving pressure effect is usefully characterized by a newly introduced dimensionless number and it is this parameter which determines the valve behavior . this summary paper presents information about the subdynamic regime using data ( otherwise difficult to access ) obtained for several recently developed flow control valves . the purely subdynamic regime is an extreme . most present - day microfluidic valves are operated at higher Re , but the paper shows that the laws governing subdynamic flows provide relations useful as an asymptotic reference . 
hydrodynamic cavitation in flows through a micro-orifice entrenched in a microchannel has been detected and experimentally investigated . microfabrication techniques have been employed to design and develop a microfluidic device containing an <nUm> mm wide micro-orifice inside a <nUm> mm wide and <nUm> mm deep microchannel . the flow of de-ionized water through the micro-orifice reveals the presence of multifarious cavitating flow regimes . this investigation divulges both similarities and differences between cavitation in micro-orifices and cavitation in their macroscale counterparts . the low incipient cavitation number obtained from the current experiments suggests a dominant size scale effect . choking cavitation is observed to be independent of any pressure or velocity scale effects . however , choking is significantly influenced by the small stream nuclei residence time at such scales . flow rate choking leads to the establishment of a stationary cavity . large flow and cavitation hysteresis have been detected at the microscale leading to very high desinent cavitation numbers . the rapid transition from incipient bubbles to choking cavitation and subsequent supercavitation suggests the presence of radically different flow patterns at the microscale . supercavitation results in a thick cavity , which extends throughout the microchannel , and is encompassed by the liquid . cavitation at the microscale is expected to considerably influence the design of innovative high - speed microfluidic systems . 
A microfabricated fluorescence activated cell sorter based on an optical switch enables low - stress sorting of small cell populations ( i.e. <nUm> - <nUm> cells ) , a regime that is not addressed by current cell sorters . the glass microchannels are packaged in a self - contained plastic cartridge that enables " chip - to - world " interconnect for ease of use . the sample is hydrodynamically focused using pneumatic pressure driven flow control and is biased to the waste reservoir by default . A <nUm> mW , <nUm> nm semiconductor laser is used for cell detection and fluorescence excitation . A sorting event is triggered based on the fluorescence and light scatter properties of the cell . the optical switch is produced from a <nUm> W CW <nUm> nm ytterbium fiber laser that is controlled by an acousto - optic modulator to deflect the target cell to the target reservoir . cells can be recovered after the sort for further manipulations . sotting performance was evaluated using a stably transfected , GFP expressing HeLa cell line spiked at varying ratios into parental HeLa cells . throughputs ranged from 20-100 cells / sec depending on initial cell concentrations and flow parameters . target purities greater than <nUm> % were obtained in most cases with overall recoveries greater than <nUm> % . A <nUm> % subpopulation of GFP - HeLa cells could be enriched by 63-71 fold . similar results were demonstrated using samples from pancreas and other primary tissues . optical switching can be scaled to fluidic networks of greater complexity by multiplexing an optical source to multiple locations on a chip , and these locations can be arbitrarily reconfigurable . 
an overview is given of current developments in micromixing technology , where the emphasis is on liquid mixing in passive micromixers . the mixers presented are differentiated by the hydrodynamic principle employed , and four important principles are discussed in some detail : hydrodynamic focusing , flow separation , chaotic advection , and split - and - recombine flows . it is shown that these principles offer excellent mixing performance in various dynamical regimes . hydrodynamic focusing is a concept working very much independently of the reynolds number of the flow . flow separation offers rich dynamical behavior over a reynolds number scale of several hundred , with superior performance compared to purely diffusive mixing already found at low reynolds numbers . for chaotic advection , different implementations tailor - made for low and comparatively high reynolds numbers exist , both leading to an exponential increase of the interface between two fluids . split - and - recombine flows can only be realized in a close - to - ideal form in the low reynolds number regime . corresponding mixers can be equipped with comparatively wide channels , enabling a favorable ratio of throughput to pressure drop . the overview given in this article should enable a potential user of micromixing technology to select the most favorable concept for the application envisaged , especially in the field of chemical process technology . 
In order to understand the manner in which local changes in mechanical environment are translated into cellular activity underlying tissue level bone adaptation , there is a need to explore fluid flow regimes at small scales such as the osteocyte . recent developments provide impetus to model periosteocytic flow using computational fluid dynamics . In building this model , the local effects of fluid flow on the osteocyte cell body and its processes were analyzed . for each model , fluid flow was induced via a pressure gradient , and the CFD calculated , based on the navier - stokes equations , the shear stress at the cell - fluid interface and radial stress , acting normal to the cell surface . based on the model , the osteocyte cell body is exposed primarily to effects of hydrodynamic pressure and the cell processes are exposed primarily to shear and radial stress , with highest stress gradients at sites where the process and the cell body intersect and where two cell processes join at the gap junction . hence , this model simulates subcellular effects of fluid flow and suggests , for the first time to our knowledge , major differences in modes of loading between the domain of the cell body and that of the cell process . 
the main theoretical and experimental results from the literature about steady pressure - driven gas microflows are summarized . among the different gas flow regimes in microchannels , the slip flow regime is the most frequently encountered . for this reason , the slip flow regime is particularly detailed and the question of appropriate choice of boundary conditions is discussed . it is shown that using second - order boundary conditions allows us to extend the applicability of the slip flow regime to higher knudsen numbers that are usually relevant to the transition regime . the review of pulsed flows is also presented , as this kind of f low is frequently encountered in micropumps . the influence of slip on the frequency behavior ( pressure gain and phase ) of microchannels is illustrated . when subjected to sinusoidal pressure fluctuations , microdiffusers reveal a diode effect which depends on the frequency . this diode effect may be reversed when the depth is shrunk from a few hundred to a few μ thermally driven flows in microchannels are also described . they are particularly interesting for vacuum generation using microsystems without moving parts . 
A low - voltage , low - power microvalve for compact battery - powered portable microfluidic platforms is designed , fabricated and experimentally characterized . the microvalve employs laser - machined piezoelectric unimorphs mechanically linked to surface micromachined nickel structures anchored on corrugated SixNy-Parylene composite membrane tethers . the parylene layer also serves as a compliant sealing layer on the valve seat for reducing the leakage in the off state . A mechanical linking process to connect the bulk piezoelectric unimorphs to micromachined diaphragms in a self - aligned manner has been developed . the design enables large strokes ( <nUm> mm ) at low - actuation voltages ( <nUm> V ) consuming a comparatively low switching energy ( <nUm> nJ ) . the dependence of the measured flow rates on the modulated clearance over the orifice was found to be in good agreement with the theory of laminar flow in the low ( 1-100 ) reynolds number regime . the microvalve was experimentally characterized for both gas and liquid flows . for example , at <nUm> V unimorph actuation , a gas flow rate of <nUm> mL / min at a differential pressure of <nUm> kPa was measured . the off - state leakage rate for <nUm> V actuafion is estimated to be 10-20 mL / min . typical flow rates with pulse width modulated ( PWM ) actuation with <nUm> % duty cycle at <nUm> vpp ( <nUm> kHz ) were measured to be <nUm> mL / min at <nUm> kPa for gases and <nUm> mL / min at <nUm> kPa for liquids . 
bicolored polymeric microspheres for particle - based displays were engineered in a microfluidic device using sheath flow geometry . preparation of bichromal beads was accomplished by rapid formation of bicolored microdrops at a sheath - flow junction in a glass microdevice and subsequent polymerization . the size of the spheres could be varied in the range 50-190 um by changing the parameters of the aqueous / organic streams in the microchannels , giving highly monodisperse spheres with less than <nUm> % variation . futhermore , in order to increase the productivity , multiple channels having similar dimensions were integrated on a quartz chip by lithographic technique . we confirmed that bicolored drops of uniform size could be reliably obtained at each of the multiple junctions . the resulting spheres could be rotated to display images between a set of planar ITO electrodes by applying suitable voltages . the relation between the symmetry in flow regimes and the color distribution in droplets was also studied . 
fluidics is a technology of generating and controlling fluid flows - preferably without the action of mechanical moving components . microfluidics perform these tasks in small , typically micronsized structures . essential part of almost all microfluidic systems are flow control valves . the basic problem is the low reynolds number Re : inertial effects used in large - scale fluidics are too small relative to viscous dissipation . new approaches , such as pressure or electrokinetic driving are required . In the subdynamic , viscosity dominated flow regime , Re ceases to be of importance and for pressure - driven valves a new characterisation number was to be introduced . an example of a diverter valve , developed by the author , is described and the meaning of the new dimensionless parameter is demonstrated . 
pulse field driven electro-separations have been used for different analytical advantages , such as signal quality improvement and separation performance improvement . we have studied the temporal electro-osmosis in microchannels due to viscous diffusivity under the external pulse electric fields . theoretical studies derived from navier - stokes equations conclude the dependence of the time to steady state electro-osmosis on the channel sizes . pulse field frequency should be limited by the electro-osmosis setting-in time . we also observed the unstable electro-osmosis as the external field frequency increases . As channel geometry characterization results are employed in the mathematical models , the threshold frequencies obtained in experimental data are consistent with the computational predictions . In previous studies , effective signal quality improvement of electro-separations has been demonstrated , when external pulse fields modulate analyte velocities with synchronous lock-in detection . the results indicate signal - to - noise ratio improvement would be more significant at the high frequency regime where flicker noise is not dominant . since bandwidth limitation due to fluid viscosity constrains the pulse frequency , optimum analyte velocity modulation is in need of further investigation . under the bandwidth constrains , we have investigated the theoretical optimum modulation frequencies . 
the recent introduction of actuation mechanisms for microfluidic transport based on free surface flows raises a number of interesting questions involving efficient mixing configurations , especially in systems with small aspect ratios . this work investigates the characteristics of convective and diffusive mixing in continuous - mode streaming of thermocapillary microflows on chemically micropatterned surfaces . mixing times and mixing lengths relevant to chemical microreactors or gas sensors are investigated for various geometries and parameter ranges . scaling arguments and full numerical solutions are presented to extract optimal operating conditions . confocal fluorescence microscopy measurements of the interfacial diffusive broadening in adjacent flowing streams confirm numerical predictions . three important mixing regimes , based on analogues of purely diffusive dynamics , rhines - young shear - augmented diffusion and taylor - aris dispersion are identified and investigated for use in free surface flows with large surface - to - volume ratios . 
the effects of cylindrical orifice length and diameter on the flow rate of three commonly used pharmaceutical direct compression diluents ( lactose , dibasic calcium phosphate dihydrate and pregelatinised starch ) were investigated , besides the powder particle characteristics ( particle size , aspect ratio , roundness and convexity ) and the packing properties ( true , bulk and tapped density ) . flow rate was determined for three different sieve fractions through a series of miniature tableting dies of different orifice diameter ( <nUm> , <nUm> and <nUm> cm ) and thickness ( <nUm> , <nUm> and <nUm> cm ) . it was found that flow rate decreased with the increase of the orifice length for the small diameter ( <nUm> cm ) but for the large diameter ( <nUm> cm ) was increased with the orifice length ( die thickness ) . flow rate changes with the orifice length are attributed to the flow regime ( transitional arch formation ) and possible alterations in the position of the free flowing zone caused by pressure gradients arising from the flow of self - entrained air , both above the entrance in the die orifice and across it . modelling by the conventional jones - pilpel non-linear equation and by two machine learning algorithms ( lazy learning , LL , and feed - forward back - propagation , FBP ) was applied and predictive performance of the fitted models was compared . it was found that both FBP and LL algorithms have significantly higher predictive performance than the jones - pilpel non-linear equation , because they account both dimensions of the cylindrical die opening ( diameter and length ) . the automatic relevance determination for FBP revealed that orifice length is the third most influential variable after the orifice diameter and particle size , followed by the bulk density , the difference between bulk and tapped densities and the particle convexity . 
the development of an automated microreaction system ( AuMmRes ) is described allowing a systematic screening of process parameters for the design and optimization of chemical processes in the liquid regime . besides parameter screening , the microreaction system is also dimensioned for automated small - scale production in the kilogram range.By the adaptation of suitable actors and control techniques an active regulation of process parameters is possible . pulsation - free actors , integrated sensors ( temperature , pressure , flow , density ) , interfaces for analysis ( HPLC , online spectroscopy ) , and a well - proven process control system are essential parts of the automated microreaction system.Microfluidic structures with improved flow and mixing performance as well as microstructured flow - through sensors for monitoring pressure and mass flow have been developed and integrated into the microreaction system.As a test reaction the nitration of 2-(4-chlorobenzoyl-)benzoic acid was considered . In order to handle this highly corrosive reaction all components that are in direct contact with the reagents consist of corrosion - resistant material . 
deep reactive ion etching ( DRIE ) of borosilicate glass was carried out using F6S and F6S / Ar plasmas in an inductively coupled plasma ( ICP ) reactor . electroplated Ni on Cu ( [?]50 nm ) / Cr ( [?]100 nm ) / glass structure using patterned SU-8 photoresist mask with a line spacing of 12-15 mm was used as a hard - mask for plasma etching . plasma etching of borosilicate glass was performed by varying the various process parameters such as the gas chemistry , the gas flow ratio , the top electrode power , and the dc self - bias voltage ( vdc ) . In the case of using F6S gas only , the profiles of the etched channel showed the undercut below the Ni hard - mask due to a chemical etching and the microtrenching at the bottom of the etched channel . an optimized process using the F6S plasmas showed the glass etch rate of [?]750 nm / min . the addition of the Ar gas to the SF <nUm> gas removed the undercut and microtrenching but decreased the etch rate to [?]540 nm / min . the increasing and decreasing time - dependent etch rates with the etch depth in the F6S ( <nUm> sccm ) and SF <nUm> ( <nUm> % ) / ar(40 % ) plasmas , respectively , were ascribed to the different ion - to - neutral flux ratios leading to the different etch process regime . 
induced - charge electro-osmosis ( ICEO ) is demonstrated around an isolated platinum wire in a polymer microchannel filled with low - concentration ClK , subject to a weak alternating electric field . In contrast to ac electro-osmosis at electrode arrays , which shares the same slip mechanism , ICEO has a more general frequency dependence , including steady flow in the dc limit ( since the wire is not an electrode driving the field ) . the flow profile inside the device , measured by particle image velocimetry , confirms the predicted scaling with the square of the applied voltage , as well as the characteristic cut - off frequency . A quantitative comparison with numerical solutions of the models equations is reported for various equivalent circuit models from the literature . the standard model of linear capacitors captures the basic trends , but systematically over-predicts the velocity . A better fit to experiment can be obtained with a complex impedance , taking into account the frequency dispersion of capacitance , although the microscopic justification of this model is unclear especially in the presence of electro-osmotic flow and applied voltages well into the non-linear regime . 
conductance characteristics of nanofluidic channels ( nanochannels ) fall into two regimes : at low ionic concentrations , conductance is governed by surface charge while at high ionic concentrations it is determined by nanochannel geometry and bulk ionic concentration . we used aminosilane chemistry and streptavidin - biotin binding to study the effects of surface reactions on nanochannel conductance at different ionic concentrations . immobilization of small molecules such as aminosilane or biotin mainly changes surface charge , affecting conductance only in the low concentration regime . however , streptavidin not only modifies surface charge but also occludes part of the channel , resulting in observable conductance changes in both regimes . our observations reflect the interplay between the competing effects of charge and size of streptavidin on nanochannel conductance . 
enhancing the species mixing in microfluidic applications is key to reducing analysis time and increasing device portability . the mixing in electroosmotic flow is usually diffusion - dominated . recent numerical studies have indicated that the introduction of electrically charged surface heterogeneities may augment mixing efficiencies by creating localized regions of flow circulation . In this study , we experimentally visualized the effects of surface charge patterning and developed an optimized electrokinetic micromixer applicable to the low reynolds number regime . using the optimized micromixer , mixing efficiencies were improved between <nUm> and <nUm> % for the applied potentials ranging from <nUm> to <nUm> V / cm when compared with the negatively charged homogeneous case . for producing a <nUm> % mixture , this equates to a potential decrease in the required mixing channel length of up to <nUm> % for flows with peclet numbers between <nUm> and <nUm> . 
within the last decade , fluorescence microscopy of single molecules of DNA in a plethora of flow fields has allowed an unprecedented examination of the dynamics of polymers in flow . As a result , new principles ( e.g. " molecular individualism " ) have been developed regarding these dynamics and old debates ( e.g. conformational hysteresis of polymers in extensional flow ) have received a fresh airing . the coupling of the microscopy , employing a spectrum of possible DNA molecules , fragments , and concatemers with dynamic simulation ( e.g. brownian dynamics ) has created a tremendous opportunity to both revisit unanswered questions in the field of polymer solution dynamics ( particularly in the nonlinear flow regime ) , as well as to examine new areas surrounding the engineering of flow dynamics of complex fluids in microfluidic devices . the foundation for future studies has been laid by careful experimentation and computer simulation of DNA dynamics in bulk or locally linear flows of many types . future studies involving collective effects , complex flows , flow - induced reaction , adsorption and so forth are just beginning and again the promise is to develop a new understanding of these polymer processes by examining DNA " one molecule at a time " . 
gaseous flow through a microchannel is treated numerically and analytically in order to assess pressure and mass flow losses due to a constriction of a finite length . numerical modeling of two - dimensional ( 2-D ) microchannel flow in the slip and transitional regimes is carried out using the direct simulation monte carlo ( DSMC ) method . the prediction of pressure losses and mass flow based on a simple analytic model for constriction microchannel flow are found to be in excellent agreement with DSMC simulations . constriction has a dramatic effect on pressure loss and mass flow rate for the considered cases . the DSMC results indicate that the flow in the constriction microchannel separates in the transition section , but the separation does not significantly impact pressure distributions . 
electro-osmotic flow ( EOF ) in microchannels is restricted to low reynolds number regimes . since the inertia forces are extremely weak in such regimes , turbulent conditions do not readily develop . therefore , species mixing occurs primarily by diffusion , with the result that extended mixing channels are generally required . In this paper we present an investigation to predict the optimal applied voltage for the side channel type micromixer ( SCTM ) which is capable of continuous sample mixing for microfluidic applications . the device uses electrokinetical focusing which is an important EOF phenomenon . In this study , according to the conservation of mass , a simple theoretical model , based on the ' flow-rate-ratio ' model and kirchhoffs law , is first proposed to predict the performance of the device . computational fluid dynamics simulations are performed to investigate the effect of this model on the mixing efficiency . the results reveal that the mixing efficiency can be enhanced by using ' flow-rate-ratio ' model and kirchhoffs law to predict the optimal applied voltage . 
electroosmotic flow ( EOF ) in microchannels is restricted to low reynolds number regimes . since the inertial forces are extremely weak in such regimes , turbulent conditions do not readily develop . therefore , species mixing occurs primarily via diffusion , with the result that extended mixing channels are generally required . the present study considers a t-shaped microchannel configuration with a mixing channel of width W = <nUm> mm . computational fluid dynamics simulations and experiments were performed to investigate the influence on the mixing efficiency of various geometrical parameters , including the side - channel width , the side - channel separation , and the number of side - channel pairs . the influence of different applied voltages is also considered . the numerical results reveal that the mixing efficiency can be enhanced to yield a fourfold improvement by incorporating two pairs of side channels into the mixing channel . it was also found that the mixing performance depends significantly upon the magnitudes of the applied voltages . 
In this paper , nitrogen gas flow in long microchannels with square cross section is simulated numerically with a three - dimensional continuum model . the governing equations of the model are solved by a control volume method . numerical results are verified with analytical solutions for the range of hydraulic diameters investigated at constant L / dh ratio of <nUm> and pressure ratio of <nUm> . As the pressure ratio is small and therefore the compressibility effect is negligible in this study . A parametric study is conducted at the same L / dh and pressure ratio . by reducing the hydraulic diameter down from <nUm> mm to <nUm> mm , the gas flow inside the microchannels switches from continuum to free molecular flows . the no - slip flow simulation results provide a constant fRe = <nUm> , which is very close to the analytical result of fRe = <nUm> . slip flow condition reduces the friction factor and starts to drop fRe at dh = <nUm> mm in the continuum regime . 
In this paper , we have studied the droplet movements and continuous flows confined between two rough and hydrophobic surfaces . A recently proposed mean - field free - energy lattice boltzmann model was employed . the movement of contact point over a well - patterned rough surface displays a periodic sticking-jumping-slipping behavior ; while the dynamic contact angle changes accordingly from maximum to minimum values . these complex varying behaviors are totally different from those on flat surfaces and implies more carefulness is necessary in interpreting measured contact angles on rough surfaces . two regimes were found of the droplet velocity changing with the surface roughness : first decreasing and then increasing ; and qualitative analysis was given . we have also studied the continuous flow rates and two cases , with and without vapor trapped , were compared . simulation results show the vapor trapped can indeed reduce the resistance to fluid motion from the channel surfaces , and such information could be useful for microfluidic applications . 
industrial trends are presenting major challenges and opportunities for research on two - phase flows in microchannels . semiconductor companies are developing 3D circuits , for which multilevel microfluidic cooling is important . gas delivery microchannels are promising for PEM fuel cells in portable electronics . however , data and modeling are needed for flow regime stability , liquid entrainment / clogging , and bubble inception / departure in complex 2D and 3D geometries . this paper provides an overview of the stanford two - phase microfluidics program , with a focus on recent experimental and theoretical progress . microfabrication technologies are used to distribute heaters , thermometers , pressure sensors , and liquid injection ports along the flow path . liquid PIV quantifies forces on bubbles and fluorescence imaging detects flow shapes and liquid volume fraction . separated flow models account for conjugate conduction , liquid injection , evaporation , and a variety of flow regimes . this work benefits strongly from interactions with semiconductor and fuel cell companies , which are seeking validated models for product design . 
direct measurement techniques are employed to quantify the kinematics of DNA flows in micro-contraction devices . flow through micro-contractions subjects the fluid to large spatial gradients in velocity , thereby eliciting viscoelastic effects . additionally , in this microfluidic flow environment , the fully extended length of the macromolecule L will approach the characteristic length scale of the channel geometry h . this is a unique flow environment that is not yet well understood . knowledge of the fundamental physics that govern this flow regime will have a profound impact on optimization of lab - on - a - chip systems incorporating macromolecular flows . this study investigates the flow of semi-dilute X-DNA solutions in a <nUm> : <nUm> micro-contraction where L / h ~ <nUm> . video microscopy and streak images of semi-dilute DNA flows reveal large vortex regions in the comers of the contraction , which are indicative of strong elastic behavior . velocity fields constructed using digital particle image velocimetry ( DPIV ) demonstrate the first use of this tool for obtaining velocity measurements of viscoelastic flows in microfluidic systems . 
gas flow in microchannels can often encounter tangential slip motion at the solid surface even under creeping flow conditions . to simulate low speed gas flows with knudsen numbers extending into the transition regime , alternative methods to both the navier - stokes and direct simulation monte carlo approaches are needed that balance computational efficiency and simulation accuracy . the lattice boltzmann method offers an approach that is particularly suitable for mesoscopic simulation where details of the molecular motion are not required . In this paper , the lattice boltzmann method has been applied to gas flows with finite knudsen number and the tangential momentum accommodation coefficient has been implemented to describe the gas - surface interactions . for fully - developed channel flows , the results of the present method are in excellent agreement with the analytical slip - flow solution of the navier - stokes equations , which are valid for knudsen numbers less than <nUm> . the present paper demonstrates that the lattice boltzmann approach is a promising alternative simulation tool for the design of microfluidic devices . 
the precise control and manipulation of small masses of liquids is an important requirement in the lab - on - a - chip technology . net fluid flows induced by ac potentials applied to arrays of co-planar interdigitated microelectrodes are reported . two types of microelectrode structures have been studied : arrays of unequal width electrodes subjected to a single ac signal , and arrays of identical electrodes subjected to a travelling - wave potential . experiments were performed using solutions of CK in water of conductivities around 1mS / m placed on top of the electrodes . fluorescent latex particles were used as tracers . In both microstructures , two fluid flow regimes have been observed : at small voltage amplitudes the fluid moves in a certain direction , and at higher voltage amplitudes the fluid flow is reversed . the fluid flow seems to be driven at the level of the electrodes in the two regimes . A theoretical model of ac electroosmosis is described . the model is based upon the Gouy-Chapman-Stern theory of the double layer . the theoretical results are in qualitative accordance with the experimental observations at low voltages . 
this paper describes the fabrication , packaging and characterization of novel multilayer polymer microfluidic systems fabricated by a CMOS compatible process . these microfluidic devices were specially designed for BioMOEMS applications . embedded multilayer rectangular smooth and uniform microchannels , <nUm> to <nUm> mm wide and <nUm> mm deep were studied . steady - state flow rates and pressure driven flow control were measured in the laminar flow regime . flow rates ranging from <nUm> to <nUm> ml / min , at pressure drop ranging from <nUm> to <nUm> kPa , were obtained . these flow rates yield reynolds numbers ( Re ) up to <nUm> . results indicate that the experimental Re and the flow friction coefficient ( f ) are in good agreement with the laminar flow theory . these experimental results facilitate the future designs of different microfluidic devices designed by using classical fluidic theory . we also present two different methods developed for macro / microfluidic packaging in order to connect these microfluidic devices to the macroscopic world . the microsystem packaging can withstand pressure drops up from <nUm> to <nUm> kPa with any liquid leakage . 
we report on the experimental observation of a spatiotemporal resonance phenomenon , in which a temporal excitation locks with a spatial pattern in an open flow system . the observation is made in a microfluidic system . we obtain the expected regimes - mixing and resonant patterns-in qualitative agreement with the theory . As an application , we realized a dual system particle extraction - micromixer . 
In this work , the flow of immiscible fluids in microchannels is studied . flow pattern diagrams obtained in microfluidic chips are presented . monodisperse droplets or parallel flows are obtained depending on the flow rate values of the aqueous phase and the oil phase . transition from droplet regime to parallel flows can not be described in terms of capillary numbers . using confocal microscopy and high speed imaging , it was shown that droplets are formed through a blocking - pinching mechanism ruled by flow rate conservation . conditions for parallel flow stability are quantified . 
we provide analysis of different regimes of diffusion and laminar flow convection combined with bimolecular surface reactions relevant to biochemical assays performed in microfluidic devices . analytic solutions for concentration fields are compared to predictions from two - dimensional finite element simulations for the various operation regimes . the analytic and numerical results extend the transport models beyond the models commonly used to interpret results from surface plasmon resonance ( SPR ) experiments . particular emphasis is placed on the characterization of transport in shallow microfluidic channels in which the fully developed transport regime dominates rather than the mass transfer boundary layer transport typically encountered in SPR . under fast reaction and diffusion conditions , the surfaces saturate following moving front kinetics similar to that observed in chromatographic columns . two key parameters relevant to on - chip biochemical assays and microfluidic sensors are studied and compiled : the capture fraction of the bulk analyte at the surface and the saturation time scale of the reactive surfaces . the physical processes in the different regimes are illustrated with data from the relevant microfluidics literature . 
studying gaseous flows in microsystems requires that rarefaction effects be taken into account . the significant length scales for gaseous microflows and the encountered flow regimes are presented . the analytical methods for the modeling of the slip flow regime , frequent in microfluidic applications , are detailed . numerical methods for the simulation of micro gaseous flows are also examined , with emphasis on the direct simulation monte carlo method . finally , some specific applications of thermal micropumping based on rarefaction effects are presented . 
various aspects of microfluidic flows with different immiscible constituents are addressed . the fundamental physical characteristics are proposed , as well as the flow regimes which are determined by the wetting and surface tension properties . these fundamental aspects are followed by engineering applications that emerge in microfluidics , namely the creation of microbubbles or drops . further applications are also discussed , such as the transfer of heat in bubbly flows , or the transport of colloids and emulsions . 
this paper develops criteria for the prediction of two distinct instabilities in microflows , one isothermal , the other with heat transfer . the engineering objective is to transport droplets that act as micro-reactors and are carried through various processes in a carrier fluid to prepare sample reactants or complete a chemical reaction . the requirement is that the carrier fluid flow be stable so that droplet trajectories can be accurately controlled . the popular two - dimensional microfluidic geometry of three streamlines merging at a junction is chosen for this analysis . A dimensional analysis of the governing flow - field and boundary conditions is undertaken to derive the non-dimensional groups upon which the flow characteristics of the junction are dependent . the emerging parameters are the grasshof number ( gr ) and reynolds numbers ( Re ) of both inlet streams . experimental flow visualisation images are used to determine the relationship between these scaling groups for both isothermal flow and buoyancy opposing mixed convection . the experimental range of inlet Re 's is from <nUm> to <nUm> . it is found that the ratio of the inlet Re 's is sufficient to describe isothermal flows and that a parameter referred to as W* ( the product of the richardson number ( ri ) and Re of the centreline stream ) provides a good correlation for buoyancy opposing mixed convection . inertia dominated flow regimes are seen to exist for W* values below approximately <nUm> and re-circulation zones are observed when W* is increased above this value . it was also observed that buckling flow was attainable at a critical Re of <nUm> for isothermal flow and that this critical Re is significantly reduced as W* is increased . an analogy is drawn from the results between the flow studied in this paper and that of cross flow over bluff objects such as a cylinder . finally , based on the results of this work a design envelope is developed for predicting the stability of scaled models of the fluidic junction . 
this paper examines geometric scaling models for field flow fractionation systems to understand how channel dimensions affect resolution and retention . specifically , the changing contribution of the instrumental plate height during miniaturization of field flow fractionation ( FFF ) systems is reported . the work is directed towards determining the optimal geometrical parameters for miniaturization of field flow fractionation systems . the experimental relationship between channel height in FFF systems and instrumental plate heights is reported . FFF scaling models are modified to : ( i ) better clarify the dependence of plate height and resolution on channel height in FFF and ( ii ) include a more complete geometrical scaling analysis and model comparison in the low retention regime . electrical field flow fractionation has been shown to benefit from miniaturization , so this paper focuses on that subtype , but surprisingly , the results also indicate the possibility of improvement in performance with miniaturization of other field flow fractionation systems including general FFF subtypes in which the applied field does not vary with channel height . this paper also discusses the potential role of more powerful microscale field flow fractionation systems as a new class of sample preparation units for micro-total-analysis systems ( m-TAS ) . 
this mini-review reports the recent advances in the hydrodynamic techniques for formation of bubbles of gas in liquid in microfluidic systems . systems comprising ducts that have widths of the order of <nUm> micrometers produce suspensions of bubbles with narrow size distributions . certain of these systems have the ability to tune the volume fraction of the gaseous phase - over the whole range from zero to one . the rate of flow of the liquids through the devices determines the mechanism of formation of the bubbles - from break-up controlled by the rate of flow of the liquid ( at low capillary numbers , and in the presence of strong confinement by the walls of the microchannels ) , to dynamics dominated by inertial effects ( at high weber numbers ) . the region of transition between these two regimes exhibits nonlinear behaviours , with period doubling cascades and irregular bubbling as prominent examples . microfluidic systems provide new and uniquely controlled methods for generation of bubbles , and offer potential applications in micro-flow chemical processing , synthesis of materials , and fluidic optics . 
the effect of channel diameter on two - phase flow was investigated to identify the phenomena which distinguish microchannels from minichannels . experiments were conducted with a mixture of nitrogen gas and water in circular channels of <nUm> , <nUm> , <nUm> , and <nUm> mm diameter . the temperature , pressure and flow rates of the liquid and gas were measured and images of the flow patterns recorded . the two - phase flow was characterized by the flow regime map , void fraction , and frictional pressure drop . In the <nUm> and <nUm> mm channels , the two - phase flow characteristics were similar to those typically observed in minichannels of ∼ <nUm> mm diameter . In the <nUm> and <nUm> mm channels , the two - phase flow behaviour departed from that observed in minichannels -- the occurrence of slug flow dominated , the void fraction - volumetric quality relationship departed from a linear armand - type correlation , and mass flux no longer influenced the two - phase frictional multiplier . clearly , the channel diameter has an effect on two - phase flow in the range of channel diameters investigated . A new slug flow model is also proposed to gain physical insight into the observed flow characteristics in microchannels . the model can predict the two - phase frictional pressure gradient for the <nUm> and <nUm> mm channels , if the actual void fraction data are used , substantiating the assumed flow mechanism . 
the dynamics of vesicles under a shear flow are analyzed analytically in the small deformation regime . we derive two coupled nonlinear equations which describe the vesicle orientation in the flow and its shape evolution . A new type of motion is found , namely , a " vacillating - breathing " mode : the vesicle orientation undergoes an oscillation around the flow direction , while the shape executes breathing dynamics . this solution coexists with tumbling . moreover , we provide an explicit expression for the tumbling threshold . A rheological law for a dilute vesicle suspension is outlined . 
the letter reports an experimental study of microfluidic droplets produced in T junctions and subjected to a local periodic forcing . synchronized and quasiperiodic regimes - organized into arnold tongues and devil staircases - are reported for the first time for a system dedicated to drop emission . the nature of the dynamical regime controls the droplet characteristics . these phenomena are mostly controlled by the characteristics of the forcing and the flow conditions . 
to investigate the break-up of emulsion droplets in pre-mix or dead - end membrane emulsification , a microscopic study was conducted in microfluidic devices . channels with shapes such as constrictions , junctions , and combinations thereof representing ideal membrane structures where etched in silicon . through these structures pre-mix emulsion droplets where pushed , which was recorded with high - speed video microscopy . accumulation of droplets of the dispersed phase before and inside the pore network was found to occur under all conditions . thus , the effective volume fraction of dispersed phase inside the pores is always high . In a brick - shaped pore structure , an optimum thickness of the layer was found . In these structures , channelling occurs below a critical pressure difference over the structure . In the channelling regime , isolated channels are active , effectively excluding action of branchings and junctions . we found three main categories of break-up mechanisms ( snap - off due to localized shear , break-up due to interfacial tension effects , and break-up due to steric hindrance ) and were able to quantify some . break-up due to branchings and junctions do not seem to be essential for break-up to occur . it is , however , clear that the other phenomena ( accumulation , channelling ) can have major impact on the total behaviour of the system and should not be neglected . 
industrial trends are presenting major challenges and opportunities for research on two - phase flows in microchannels . semiconductor companies are developing 3D circuits for which multilevel microfluidic cooling is important . gas delivery microchannels are promising for PEM fuel cells in portable electronics . however , data and modeling are needed for flow regime stability , liquid entrainment / clogging , and bubble inception / departure in complex 2D and 3D geometries . this paper provides an overview of the stanford two - phase microfluidics program , with a focus on recent experimental and theoretical progress . microfabrication technologies are used to distribute heaters , thermometers , pressure sensors , and liquid injection ports along the flow path . liquid PIV quantifies forces on bubbles , and fluorescence imaging detects flow shapes and liquid volume fraction . separated flow models account for conjugate conduction , liquid injection , evaporation , and a variety of flow regimes . this work benefits strongly from interactions with semiconductor and fuel cell companies seeking validated models for product design . 
mixing of fluids at the microscale poses a variety of challenges , many of which arise from the fact that molecular diffusion is the dominant transport mechanism in the laminar flow regime . while considerable progress has been made toward developing strategies to achieve improved mixing in microfluidic systems , many of these techniques introduce additional complexity to device fabrication and / or operation processes . In this work , we explore the use of compact spiral - shaped flow geometries designed to achieve efficient mixing in a format that can be constructed using a single planar soft lithography step without the need for multilayer alignment . A series of <nUm> mm-wide by <nUm> mm-tall channels were constructed , each of which incorporated a series of spiral shaped sections arrayed along the flow path . five spiral designs with varying channel lengths were investigated , and mixing studies were carried out at flow rates corresponding to reynolds numbers ranging from <nUm> to <nUm> . under appropriate conditions , transverse dean flows are induced that augment diffusive transport and promote enhanced mixing in considerably shorter downstream distances as compared with conventional planar straight channel designs . mixing efficiency can be further enhanced by incorporating expansion vortex effects via abrupt changes in cross-sectional area along the flow path . 
A phase - field method is applied to the modeling of flow and breakup of droplets in a t-shaped junction in the hydrodynamic regime where capillary and viscous stresses dominate over inertial forces , which is characteristic of microfluidic devices . the transport equations are solved numerically in the three - dimensional geometry , and the dependence of the droplet breakup on the flow rates , surface tension and viscosities of the two components is investigated in detail . the model reproduces quite accurately the phase diagram observed in experiments performed with immiscible fluids . the critical capillary number for droplet breakup depends on the viscosity contrast , with a trend which is analogous to that observed for individual isolated droplets in hyperbolic flow . 
microfluidic systems ( lab - on - a - chip devices ) are employed in micro-technology having applications in protein and DNA analysis , sensors , and micro electronics mechanical systems . these systems operate in a pressure driven flow regime with no moving parts to drag the fluids . our research aims at developing rigorous assessment and quantification of mixing in microchannels . the work presented is based on numerical simulations of flow in different geometries coupled with mixing assessment using entropic measures . the results show enhanced mixing efficiency for the geometry similar to the staggered herringbone mixer by comparison with a mixer with straight diagonal ridges and lack of mixing in a non-patterned channel . 
the flow of binary gaseous mixtures through rectangular microchannels due to small pressure , temperature , and molar concentration gradients over the whole range of the knudsen number is studied . the solution is based on a mesoscale approach , formally described by two coupled kinetic equations , subject to diffuse scattering boundary conditions . the model proposed by McCormack substitutes the complicated collision term and the resulting kinetic equations are solved by an accelerated version of the discrete velocity method . typical results are presented for the flow rates and the heat fluxes of two different binary mixtures ( Ne-Ar and He-Xe ) with various molar concentrations , in two - dimensional microchannels of different aspect ( height to width ) ratios . the formulation is very efficient and can be used instead of the classical method of solving the navier - stokes equations with slip boundary conditions , which is restricted by the hydrodynamic regime . moreover , the present formulation is a good alternative to the direct simulation monte carlo method , which often becomes computationally inefficient . 
on the basis of langmuir 's theory of adsorption of gases on solids , the effect of temperature jump on microscale heat transfer is investigated . A mathematical model , extended from the classical graetz problem , is developed to analyze convective heat transfer in a microtube in various slip - flow regimes . the surface slip corrections are made by employing the langmuir model , as well as the conventional maxwell model . the effects of axial heat conduction are also investigated by extending the finite integral transform technique to the slip - flow case . we show that the langmuir model always predicts a reduction in heat transfer with increasing rarefaction , as does the maxwell model , except when the energy accommodation coefficient is relatively much smaller than that for momentum accommodation . this implies that , for most physical applications , the reynolds analogy between heat transfer and momentum transfer is preserved in slip - flow regimes with low mach numbers . 
the fabrication , characterization and packaging of novel microfluidic - optical integrated biosensors for label - free biochemical detection is presented in this paper . the integrated device consists of a three - dimensional embedded microchannel network fabricated using enhanced CMOS compatible SU-8 multilevel polymer technology on top of a wafer containing mach - zehnder interferometer ( MZI ) nanophotonic biosensor devices . PMMA housing provides connection to the macro-world and ensures robust leakage - free flow operation of the devices . this macro-microfluidic module can operate at pressure drops up to <nUm> kPa . fluid flow experiments have been performed in order to demonstrate the robustness of our microfluidic devices . the devices have been designed to operate under continuous flow . steady - state flow rates ranging from <nUm> to <nUm> nl min-1 at pressure drops ranging from <nUm> to <nUm> kPa were measured in the laminar flow regime . experimental results are in good agreement with laminar flow theory . the first interferometric sensing measurements are presented in order to demonstrate the functionality of these novel integrated devices for lab - on - a - chip and label - free biosensing applications . A bulk refractive index detection limit of <nUm> × <nUm> <nUm> was obtained , close to the minimum detected up to now by label - free biosensor devices without microfluidic integration . As far as we know , this is the first time that a label - free biosensor device is integrated within a microfluidic network using a wafer - level CMOS compatible process technology . 
the specific character of biological enzyme catalysts enables combined fuel and oxidant channels and simplified non-compartmentalized fuel cell assemblies . In this work , a microstructured enzymatic biofuel cell architecture is proposed , and species transport phenomena combined with consecutive chemical reactions are studied computationally in order to provide guidelines for optimization . this is the first computational study of this technology , and a 2D CFD model for species transport coupled with laminar fluid flow and michaelis - menten enzyme kinetics is established . it is shown that the system is reaction rate limited , indicating that enzyme specific turnover numbers are key parameters for biofuel cell performance . separated and mixed enzyme patterns in different proportions are analyzed for various peclet numbers . high fuel utilization is achieved in the diffusion dominated and mixed species transport regimes with separated enzymes arranged in relation to individual turnover rates . however , the peclet number has to be above a certain threshold value to obtain satisfying current densities . the mixed transport regime is particularly attractive while current densities are maintained close to maximum levels . optimum performance is achieved by mixed enzyme patterning tailored with respect to individual turnover rates , enabling high current densities combined with nearly complete fuel utilization . 
covalent surface modification techniques , in particular surface oxidation procedures , have been employed as a mean to modify polymer microfluidic channels for the purpose of modulating microflow . the focus of this work is to experimentally and computationally characterize electroosmotic flow ( EOF ) to understand the impact of surface modifications and buffer pH on sample mixing and dispersion . the experimental results are used to calibrate and validate the simulation model that solves the navier - stokes equation for fluid flow and poisson equation to resolve external electric field . experimental and simulated results are presented for hybrid microfluidic systems , consisting of both pristine polymer surfaces and chemically modified polymer surfaces . the results show that the selective surface modification induces hydrodynamic pressure gradient , leading to enhanced sample dispersion . the mass flow rate increases linearly with the level of oxidation . all channels ( pristine , oxidized , and hybrid ) showed an increasing EOF with increasing pH until the near neutral regime ( <nUm> < pH < <nUm> ) , where the EOF leveled off at a maximum value - behavior that is typical of a microchannel with negative surface moieties populating its surface . 
this paper presents a numerical simulation investigation into electroosmotic flow mixing in three - dimensional microchannels with patterned non-uniform surface zeta potentials . three types of micromixers are investigated , namely a straight diagonal strip mixer ( i.e. the non-uniform surface zeta potential is applied along straight , diagonal strips on the lower wall of the mixing channel ) , a staggered asymmetric herringbone strip mixer and a straight diagonal / symmetric herringbone strip mixer . A particle tracing algorithm is used to visualize and evaluate the mixing performance of the various mixers . the particle trajectories and poincare maps of the various mixers are calculated from the three - dimensional flow fields . the surface charge patterns on the lower walls of the microchannels induce electroosmotic chaotic advection in the low reynolds number flow regime , and hence enhance the passive mixing effect in the microfluidic devices . A quantitative measure of the mixing performance based on shannon entropy is employed to quantify the mixing of two miscible fluids . the results show that the mixing efficiency increases as the magnitude of the heterogeneous zeta potential ratio ( |zR| ) is increased , but decreases as the aspect ratio ( H / W ) is increased . the mixing efficiency of the straight diagonal strip mixer with a length ratio of l / W ≤ <nUm> is slightly higher than that obtained from the same mixer with l / W ≤ <nUm> . finally , the staggered asymmetric herringbone strip mixer with ≤ <nUm> ° , zR ≤ <nUm> , l / W ≤ <nUm> and H / W ≤ <nUm> provides the optimal mixing performance of all the mixers presented in this study . 
effective and fast mixing is important for many microfluidic applications . In many cases , mixing is limited by molecular diffusion due to constrains of the laminar flow in the microscale regime . according to scaling law , decreasing the mixing path can shorten the mixing time and enhance mixing quality . one of the techniques for reducing mixing path is sequential segmentation . this technique divides solvent and solute into segments in axial direction . the so - called taylor - aris dispersion can improve axial transport by three orders of magnitudes . the mixing path can be controlled by the switching frequency and the mean velocity of the flow . mixing ratio can be controlled by pulse width modulation of the switching signal . this paper first presents a simple time - dependent one - dimensional analytical model for sequential segmentation . the model considers an arbitrary mixing ratio between solute and solvent as well as the axial taylor - aris dispersion . next , a micromixer was designed and fabricated based on polymeric micromachining . the micromixer was formed by laminating four polymer layers . the layers are micro machined by a CO2 laser . switching of the fluid flows was realized by two piezoelectric valves . mixing experiments were evaluated optically . the concentration profile along the mixing channel agrees qualitatively well with the analytical model . furthermore , mixing results at different switching frequencies were investigated . due to the dynamic behavior of the valves and the fluidic system , mixing quality decreases with increasing switching frequency . 
electroosmotic flow in microchannels is restricted to low reynolds number regimes . since the inertia forces are extremely weak in such regimes , turbulent conditions do not readily develop , and hence species mixing occurs primarily as a result of diffusion . consequently , achieving a thorough species mixing generally relies upon the use of extended mixing channels . this paper aims to improve the mixing performance of conventional side channel type micromixers by specifying the optimal driving voltages to be applied to each channel . In the proposed approach , the driving voltages are identified by constructing a simple theoretical scheme based on a ' flow-rate-ratio ' model and kirchhoff 's law . the numerical and experimental results confirm that the optimal voltage control approach provides a better mixing performance than the use of a single driving voltage gradient . 
background : In vitro mechanotransduction studies are designed to elucidate cell behavior in response to a well - defined mechanical signal that is imparted to cultured cells , e.g. through fluid flow . typically , flow rates are calculated based on a parallel plate flow assumption , to achieve a targeted cellular shear stress . this study evaluates the performance of specific flow / perfusion chambers in imparting the targeted stress at the cellular level . methods : to evaluate how well actual flow chambers meet their target stresses ( set for <nUm> and <nUm> dyn / cm2 for this study ) at a cellular level , computational models were developed to calculate flow velocity components and imparted shear stresses for a given pressure gradient . computational predictions were validated with micro-particle image velocimetry ( mPIV ) experiments . results : based on these computational and experimental studies , as few as <nUm> % of cells seeded along the midplane of commonly implemented flow / perfusion chambers are subjected to stresses within ± <nUm> % of the target stress . In addition , flow velocities and shear stresses imparted through fluid drag vary as a function of location within each chamber . hence , not only a limited number of cells are exposed to target stress levels within each chamber , but also neighboring cells may experience different flow regimes . finally , flow regimes are highly dependent on flow chamber geometry , resulting in significant variation in magnitudes and spatial distributions of stress between chambers . conclusion : the results of this study challenge the basic premise of in vitro mechanotransduction studies , i.e. that a controlled flow regime is applied to impart a defined mechanical stimulus to cells . these results also underscore the fact that data from studies in which different chambers are utilized can not be compared , even if the target stress regimes are comparable . 
A fluidized bed bioreactor ( FBBR ) was operated for more than <nUm> days under two regimes , methanogenic ( m ) and Methanogenic-Aerobic ( M-A ) , to remove 2,4,6-trichlorophenol ( TCP ) and phenol ( phe ) from a synthetic wastewater , containing different amounts of TCP and phe , using different aeration flow - rates ( <nUm> , <nUm> , and <nUm> NL O / l*day ) . m conditions ( <nUm> : <nUm> mg / L of TCP : phe , <nUm> NL O / l*day ) showed similar TCP and phe removal ( > <nUm> % ) . nevertheless accumulation of 4-chlorophenol ( 4CP ) up to <nUm> mg / L and phe up to <nUm> mg / L was observed , while in M-A conditions ( <nUm> : <nUm> mg / L of TCP : phe , <nUm> NL O / l-day ) TCP and phe removal achieved 99.9+ % and after <nUm> days no accumulation of intermediates were detected . the increase of TCP and phe in the influent under M-A conditions from <nUm> : <nUm> to <nUm> : <nUm> mg / L of TCP : phe did not negatively affect the removal of TCP , intermediates and phe ; in fact , they were similar to those in previous M-A conditions . the decrease in the oxygen flow rate from <nUm> to <nUm> NL O / l*day had no negative effect on pollutant removals , which were as high as in previous two M-A conditions . the specific methanogenic activity of bioparticles of the fluidized bed decreased with long - term partial aeration , starting from <nUm> mmol CH <nUm> / h*gTKN in the m regime ( day <nUm> ) to < <nUm> mmolCH4 / h*gTKN at day <nUm> , suggesting aerobic regime in the bioreactor rather than an M-A regime . In conclusion , complete removal of TCP and less chlorinated intermediates could be achieved in an initially methanogenic FBBR under conditions of partial aeration , although long - term operation seemed to negatively affect the methanogenic activity of biomass . it is also likely that after extended aeration the microbial community was finally enriched with strains with the ability to attack 2,4,6-TCP under aerobic conditions . this report represents the first evidence of a long exposure to oxygen of an anaerobic microbial consortium that efficiently remove TCP . 
we have utilized a computational model of the expansion of a microbubble in a liquid - filled flexible tube to investigate the potential for acoustic vaporization of perfluorocarbon droplets to damage blood vessels during a novel gas embolotherapy technique for the potential treatment of tumors . this model uses a fixed grid , multi-domain , interface tracking , direct numerical simulation method that treats all interfaces and boundaries as sharp discontinuities for high accuracy . In the current work , we examined effects of initial bubble size on the flows and wall stresses that result from droplet vaporization . the remaining dimensionless parameters that govern the system response ( reynolds , weber , and strouhal numbers , initial bubble pressure , and wall stiffness and tension ) were selected to model an arteriole . the results for a flexible tube are significantly different from those for a rigid tube . two major flow regimes occur due to the combined effect of bubble and tube deformation : inflow at the tube ends and outflow near the bubble surface . the flexibility of the tube largely dissipates the extreme pressure that develops in the rigid tube model . both the magnitude and the overall expansion time of the rapidly changing pressure are greatly reduced in the flexible tube . smaller initial bubble diameters , relative to the vessel diameter , result in lower wall stresses . this study indicates that wall flexibility can significantly influence the wall stresses that result from acoustic vaporization of intravascular perfluorocarbon droplets , and suggests that acoustic activation of droplets in larger , more flexible vessels may be less likely to damage or rupture vessels than activation in smaller and stiffer vessels . 
bone marrow - derived mesenchymal stem cells ( BMSCs ) are relatively accessible and exhibit a pluripotency suitable for cardiovascular applications such as tissue - engineered heart valves ( TEHVs ) . recently , sutherland et al. [ from stem cells to viable autologous semilunar heart valve . circulation <nUm> ; <nUm> : 2783-91 ] demonstrated that BMSC - seeded TEHV can successfully function as pulmonary valve substitutes in juvenile sheep for at least <nUm> months . toward determining appropriate mechanical stimuli for use in BMSC - seeded TEHV cultivation , we investigated the independent and coupled effects of two mechanical stimuli physiologically relevant to heart valves - cyclic flexure and laminar flow ( i.e. fluid shear stress)-on BMSC - mediated tissue formation . BMSC isolated from juvenile sheep were expanded and seeded onto rectangular strips of nonwoven <nUm> : <nUm> blend poly(glycolic acid ) ( PGA ) and poly(l - lactic acid ) ( PLLA ) scaffolds . following <nUm> days static culture , BMSC - seeded scaffolds were loaded into a novel flex-stretch-flow ( FSF ) bioreactor and incubated under static ( n = <nUm> ) , cyclic flexure ( n = <nUm> ) , laminar flow ( avg. wall shear stress = <nUm> dyne / cm2 ; n = <nUm> ) and combined flex - flow ( n = <nUm> ) conditions for <nUm> ( n = <nUm> ) and <nUm> ( n = <nUm> ) weeks . by <nUm> weeks , the flex - flow group exhibited dramatically accelerated tissue formation compared with all other groups , including a <nUm> % higher collagen content of <nUm> ± <nUm> mg / g wet weight ( p < <nUm> ) , and an effective stiffness ( e ) value of <nUm> ± <nUm> kPa . importantly , collagen and e values were not significantly different from values measured for vascular smooth muscle cell ( SMC ) -seeded scaffolds incubated under conditions of flexure alone [ engelmayr et al. the independent role of cyclic flexure in the early in vitro development of an engineered heart valve tissue . biomaterials <nUm> ; <nUm> : 175-87 ] , suggesting that BMSC - seeded TEHV can be optimized to yield results comparable to SMC - seeded TEHV . we thus demonstrated that cyclic flexure and laminar flow can synergistically accelerate BMSC - mediated tissue formation , providing a basis for the rational design of in vitro conditioning regimens for BMSC - seeded TEHV . 
inorganic and organic integrated systems detect , process , and respond to signals from solid media . advances in fluidic systems have offered an alternative to traditional signaling methods through the development of aqueous signaling systems . here , we show an experimentally simple mechanically governed fluidic system that creates three - dimensional molecular multiphase separation in a combination of discrete and continuous gradients analogous to digital and analog signals that can be used for controlled spatiotemporal cellular stimulation . we accomplish the pattern formation by fabricating a compartmentalized multi-level fluidics device where a network of capillaries converges into a main channel . simultaneous control of the fluid streams in the horizontal and vertical planes allows us to create hybrid aqueous patterns . this soft lithography system enables controlled diffusion schemes within the laminar flow regime in three dimensions and overcomes the limitations of monophasic delivery and planar constraints . our fluidic device has potential applications in a wide range of systems from three - dimensional biological control in cell structure and motility studies to fluidic computational devices . 
we propose a new test method for investigating which macroscopic continuum models , among the many existing models , give the best description of rarefied gas flows over a range of knudsen numbers . the merits of our method are : no boundary conditions for the continuum models are needed , no coupled governing equations are solved , while the knudsen layer is still considered . this distinguishes our proposed test method from other existing techniques ( such as stability analysis in time and space , computations of sound speed and dispersion , and the shock wave structure problem ) . our method relies on accurate , essentially noise - free , solutions of the basic microscopic kinetic equation , e.g. the boltzmann equation or a kinetic model equation ; in this paper , the BGK model and the ES - BGK model equations are considered . our method is applied to test whether one - dimensional stationary couette flow is accurately described by the following macroscopic transport models : the Navier-Stokes-Fourier equations , burnett equations , grad 's <nUm> moment equations , and the regularized <nUm> moment equations ( two types : the original , and that based on an order of magnitude approach ) . the gas molecular model is maxwellian . for knudsen numbers in the transition - continuum regime ( kn ≤ <nUm> ) , we find that the two types of regularized <nUm> moment equations give similar results to each other , which are better than grad 's original <nUm> moment equations , which , in turn , give better results than the burnett equations . the Navier-Stokes-Fourier equations give the worst results . this is as expected , considering the presumed accuracy of these models . for cases of higher knudsen numbers , i.e. kn > <nUm> , all macroscopic continuum equations tested fail to describe the flows accurately . we also show that the above conclusions from our tests are general , and independent of the kinetic model used . 
transparent and planar meso-scale fluidic structures with no movable parts , based on feedback microfluidic oscillators , were manufactured in acrylic ( using a computer numerically controlled milling machine ) and sealed using thermo - compressive bonding . internal flow images for the operation with water were analyzed considering supply flows in the range of <nUm> ml / min to <nUm> ml / min . tracers with different viscosities were injected ( continuously or in a pulsed way ) to improve contrast . depending on the constriction dimensions at the output of the feedback arms , these structures can present different behaviors associated with momentum interaction , and can be used for different applications . smaller constrictions lead to structures that oscillate in any flow regime ( <nUm> < Re < <nUm> ) while larger ones avoid oscillation but favor retention of fluid inside the feedback arms . 
this work is motivated by the recent experimental development of microfluidic flow - focusing devices that produce highly monodisperse simple or compound drops . using finite elements with adaptive meshing in a diffuse - interface framework , we simulate the breakup of simple and compound jets in coflowing conditions , and explore the flow regimes that prevail in different parameter ranges . moreover , we investigate the effects of viscoelasticity on interface rupture and drop pinch - off . the formation of simple drops exhibits a dripping regime at relatively low flow rates and a jetting regime at higher flow rates . In both regimes , drops form because of the combined effects of capillary instability and viscous drag . the drop size increases with the flow rate of the inner fluid and decreases with that of the outer fluid . viscoelasticity in the drop phase increases the drop size in the dripping regime but decreases it in the jetting regime . the formation of compound drops is a delicate process that takes place in a narrow window of flow and rheological parameters . encapsulation of the inner drop depends critically on coordination of capillary waves on the inner and outer interfaces . 
the existence of hydrodynamic cavitation in the flow of refrigerant ( R-123 ) through micro-Venturis has been viewed in the form of a bubbly cavitating regime . flow visualization discloses inchoate cavitation bubbles / bubble clouds emerging from the inside of the micro-Venturi throat egress . the bubble density decreases when the flow passes through the diffuser section and further downstream into the microchannel owing to the collapse of the vapor filled bubbles caused by a rise in the static pressure . an increase in the flow rate beyond cavitation inception results in the formation of twin cavities . the elongated cavities emerge from inside the venturi boundaries and amalgamate further downstream sending out thick and dense vapor / bubble clouds . the discharge is affected by the aggressive cavitation and flow rate choking has been observed at different backpressures . the physical properties of the liquid ( wettability , small contact angle , etc. ) assist in the inhibition of cavitation by modifying the surface nuclei population . the liquid is able to endure significant tension and remains in a metastable state before sudden rupture . flow visualization reveals considerable differences between cavitating flow patterns observed in refrigerant ( R-123 ) and water flows through a micro-Venturi system . 
wormlike micelles provide an opportunity to study the behavior of semiflexible macromolecules in elongational flows . we constructed a microfluidic cross-flow device coupled with fluorescence microscopy to image individual wormlike micelles and measure their dynamics in planar elongational flow . these polymer micelles prove stable in elongational flow and exhibit a sharp transition between regimes where brownian motion dominates the micellar dynamics and where the micelles stretch with the flow . the coil - stretch transition and micellar relaxation time were identified by examining a distribution of micelle lengths at various flow rates . the relationship between micellar relaxation time and length is consistent with hydrodynamic theory . At higher weissenberg number , micelle stretching is nearly as rapid as the rate of stretching of the surrounding fluid , yet also results more frequently in sharply folded conformations . In contrast to DNA in extensional flow , these relatively more stiff macromolecules exhibit fewer alignment modes . 
the mixing phenomena for two fluid streams in pressure - driven rectangular microchannels are analyzed and directly compared with the measurements of mixing intensity for a wide range of aspect ratio ( width / depth = 1-20 ) . In the analysis , the three - dimensional transport equation for species mixing was solved using the spectral method in a dimensionless fashion covering a large regime of the normalized downstream distance . the analysis reveals the details of non-uniform mixing process , which originates from the top and bottom walls of the channel and stretches out toward the center of the channel , and its transition to uniformity . employing different length scales for the non-uniform and uniform mixing regimes , the growth of mixing intensity can be expressed in a simple relationship for various aspect ratios in the large range . the mixing experiments were carried out on silicon- and poly(methyl methacrylate ) (PMMA)-based T - type micromixers utilizing fluids of pH indicator ( in silicon channel ) and fluorescent dye ( in PMMA channel ) to evaluate the mixing intensity based on flow visualization images . using conventional microscopes , the experiments demonstrate the mixing intensity as a power law of the stream velocity for all the microfluidic channels tested . the variations of measured mixing intensity with the normalized downstream distance are found in favorable agreement with the numerical simulations . the comparison between the experiments and simulations tells the capabilities and limitations on the use of conventional microscopes to measure the mixing performance . 
the pressure - driven transport of individual DNA molecules in 175-nm to 3.8-mm high silica channels was studied by fluorescence microscopy . two distinct transport regimes were observed . the pressure - driven mobility of DNA increased with molecular length in channels higher than a few times the molecular radius of gyration , whereas DNA mobility was practically independent of molecular length in thin channels . In addition , both the taylor dispersion and the self - diffusion of DNA molecules decreased significantly in confined channels in accordance with scaling relationships . these transport properties , which reflect the statistical nature of DNA polymer coils , may be of interest in the development of " lab - on - a - chip " technologies . 
the solutions of the flow over a plate and a cylinder with suction and anisotropic partial slip are discussed . viscous flow with partial slip occurs in a variety of situations such as the slip regime of rarefied gases and also models the boundary of rough or grooved surfaces . the anisotropy may be caused by parallel slits on the surface through which suction occurs if there are no slips , the solution reduces to the exact asymptotic suction flow . the no - slip boundary condition on a rough or striated surface is very difficult to enforce . the theoretical determination of the slip coefficient can be obtained from microfluid dynamics study of the roughness because the local reynolds number is small , the slip coefficients are determined under the stokes assumption for surfaces composed of parallel , semi-infinite fins parallel thin slats in the same plane and parallel grooves of infinite of finite depths . 
efficient mixing to promote chemical reactions is extremely desirable in lab - on - a - chip devices , but is difficult to achieve in the typical low reynolds - number flows . numerical simulation of the high peclet - number case common in microfluidics is computationally challenging , and asymptotic solutions have proved useful in understanding the interplay between convection and diffusion in particular devices . most mixing studies to date have examined non-interacting species , so that the total concentration of each is conserved . In this paper we include the effects of chemical reaction terms to describe the infinitely fast reaction between two species . analytical results identify two important timescales for the yield of the product species : an initial rhines - young shear - enhanced mixing time , and a long - time approach of the yield to its final value . the latter regime is crucial for high - efficiency microreactors , and is associated with persistent structures in the mixer flow field . 
microfluidic technology has recently been applied to the formation of controlled particulate structures , such as emulsion droplets , foams , encapsulates and gel particles . while these types of particles are typical of many foodstuffs , production of foods with microfluidics is not really possible , due to the low throughput of typical microfluidic devices , as well as the general use of model materials . here we present microfluidic technology applied to the production of monodisperse emulsion using food ingredients . In particular , we investigate the effect of surfactants and microdevice geometry on drop size and robust production regimes . the asymptotic minimum drop size is bigger in flow focusing geometries than in psi and pi junction geometries , decreasing with the addition of surfactant . several production patterns were identified and only one of which is useful to produce monodispersed emulsion . the influence of surfactant is noted as the boundaries between the various production regions vary . 
detailed computational microfluidics flow simulations have been performed to study the effect of two - phase flow regime on heat transfer in small pipes . we essentially show that only with interface tracking methods such as the level set employed here can the coupled heat - fluid flow problems well predicted , with detailed information about the physics of the transfer in tube confines . overall the heat removal rate in two - phase flow is higher than in single phase . subtle differences in thermal removal rates are revealed when flow - regime transition is triggered from bubbly to slug configuration . 
we investigate clogging of microchannels at the single - pore level using microfluidic devices as model porous media . the process of clogging is studied at low volume fractions and high flow rates , a technologically important regime . we show that clogging is independent of particle flow rate and volume fraction , indicating that collective effects do not play an important role . instead , the average number of particles that can pass through a pore before it clogs scales with the ratio of pore to particle size . we present a simple model that accounts for the data . 
even though mixing is crucial in many microfluidic applications where biological and chemical reactions are needed , efficient mixing remains a challenge since the reynolds number of these flows is typically low , thus excluding turbulence as a potential mechanism for stirring . while various approaches relying on clever geometries , cross-flows , miniature stirrers or external fields have been used in the past , our work has focused on generating stirring in microchannels of simple geometry by merely pulsing flow rates at the inlets through which the two fluids are brought into the device . flow visualizations from experiments , as well as numerical simulations , have indicated that the majority of the mixing takes place in the confluence region . even though it has been shown in previous work that good mixing can be achieved at relatively large scales using this technique , one of the challenges is to make sure that mixing occurs at small scales ( i.e. , particle scales ) as well . to address this issue , we carefully study the dynamics of tracer particles using both computational fluid dynamics and dynamical systems theory , and explore the parameter space in terms of the reynolds number , strouhal number and phase difference between the two inlet flows . specifically , we generate a bifurcation diagram in which both regular and chaotic dynamics occur . As expected , the chaotic regime exhibits stretching and folding of material lines at all ( large and small ) scales , and is thus promising as an effective mixing tool . 
we review transport characteristics of pressure - driven , multiphase flows through microchannel networks tens of nanometres to several hundred of micrometres wide with emphasis on conditions resulting in enhanced mixing and reduced axial dispersion . dimensionless scaling parameters useful in characterizing multiphase flows are summarized along with experimental flow visualization techniques . static and dynamic stability considerations are also included along with methods for stabilizing multiphase flows through surface modifications . observed gas - liquid and immiscible liquid - liquid flows are summarized in terms of flow regime diagrams and the different flows are related to applications in chemistry and materials synthesis . means to completely separate multiphase flows on the microscale and guidelines for design of scalable multiphase systems are also discussed . 
the development of advanced microchannel heat exchangers and microfluidic devices is dependent upon the understanding of the fundamental heat transfer processes that occur in these systems . there have been great advancements in our understanding of the heat transfer and fluid flow mechanisms that occur in microchannels . there is several research areas in microchannel heat transfer that so promise for such applications as microprocessor cooling . an enhanced microchannel heat exchanger ( EMCHX ) that uses single - phase liquid flows has been developed . this EMCHX uses flow obstructions to create a continually developing flow condition and the enhancement in heat transfer associated with that flow regime . A silicon substrate is chosen to create off - set strip fins in the microchannel flow field . experimental verification of this new method shows excellent improvement in heat transfer over plain or traditional microchannels with straight , continuous walls . however , careful attention must be paid to the added pressure drop that is created by adding these obstructions . A new microchannel parameter called pumping power flux is developed to aid in the comparison between plain and enhanced microchannels . the pumping power flux is used in conjunction with the heat flux to calculate a coefficient of performance to demonstrate the heat transfer enhancement . the enhanced microchannels provide a much higher COP for the same flow conditions . therefore , the improved heat transfer provided outweighs the added pressure drop caused by the enhanced microchannels . 
we describe continuous flow liquid - liquid phase separation in microfluidic devices based on capillary forces and selective wetting surfaces . effective liquid - liquid phase separation is achieved by using a thin porous fluoropolymer membrane that selectively wets non-aqueous solvents , has average pore sizes in the 0.1-1 mm range , and has a high pore density for high separation throughput . pressure drops throughout the microfluidic network are modelled and operating regimes for the membrane phase separator are determined based on hydrodynamic pressure drops and capillary forces . A microfluidic extraction device integrating mixing and phase separation is realized by using silicon micromachining . modeling of the phase separator establishes the operating limits . the device is capable of completely separating several organic - aqueous and fluorous-aqueous liquid - liquid systems , even with high fractions of partially miscible compounds . In each case , extraction is equivalent to one equilibrium extraction stage . 
even though mixing is crucial in many microfluidic applications where biological and chemical reactions are needed , efficient mixing remains a challenge since the reynolds number of these flows is typically low , thus excluding turbulence as a potential mechanism for stirring . while various approaches relying on clever geometries , cross-flows , miniature stirrers or external fields have been used in the past , our work has focused on generating stirring in microchannels of simple geometry by merely pulsing flow rates at the inlets through which the two fluids are brought into the device . flow visualizations from experiments , as well as numerical simulations , have indicated that the majority of the mixing takes place in the confluence region . even though it has been shown in previous work that good mixing can be achieved at relatively large scales using this technique , one of the challenges is to make sure that mixing occurs at small scales ( i.e. , particle scales ) as well . to address this issue , we carefully study the dynamics of tracer particles using both computational fluid dynamics and dynamical systems theory , and explore the parameter space in terms of the reynolds number , strouhal number and phase difference between the two inlet flows . specifically , we generate a bifurcation diagram in which both regular and chaotic dynamics occur . As expected , the chaotic regime exhibits stretching and folding of material lines at all ( large and small ) scales , and is thus promising as an effective mixing tool . 
In order to increase productivity of microfluidic contactors , a large number of units operating in parallel is required . for operations involving heat transfer , mass transfer and reactions , fluid velocity and residence time in the microchannels play a crucial role in system performance . therefore it is important to design microstructures able to guarantee satisfactory flow equipartition within the microchannels . In this work , flow distribution in microstructured plates of varying geometries was investigated . CFD calculations showed that two - dimensional simulations can be misleading in assessing flow maldistribution . three - dimensional models revealed the presence of a critical value of reynolds number at which a transition occurs from a flow regime fully determined by viscous forces ( where fluid distribution is independent of flow rate ) to a regime where inertial effects start to affect fluid distribution . it was found that flow distribution improves by including fins in the plate to guide the flow , increasing the length of the fins and decreasing the plate width . increasing the length of flow distribution chambers also improves flow uniformity but a limit is reached for the geometries considered , beyond which no further improvement is obtained . furthermore , modification of the flow distribution chambers and positioning of the inlet and outlet in line with the microchannels can improve flow uniformity . 
In order to gain insight into the mechanical and dynamical behaviour of free and tethered short chains of ss / ds DNA molecules in flow , and in parallel to investigate the properties of long chain molecules in flow fields , we have developed a series of quantum and molecular methods to extend the well developed equilibrium software CHARMM to handle non-equilibrium dynamics . these methods have been applied to cases of DNA molecules in shear flows in nanochannels . biomolecules , both free and wall - tethered , have been simulated in the all - atom style in solvent - filled nanochannels . the new methods were demonstrated by carrying out NEMD simulations of free single - stranded DNA ( ssDNA ) molecules of <nUm> bases as well as double - stranded DNA ( dsDNA ) molecules of <nUm> base pairs tethered on gold surfaces in an ionic water shear flow . the tethering of the linker molecule ( 6-mercapto-1-hexanol ) to perfect Au(111) surfaces was parametrized based on density functional theory ( DFT ) calculations . force field parameters were incorporated into the CHARMM database . gold surfaces are simulated in a lennard - jones style model that was fitted to the morse potential model of bulk gold . the bonding force of attachment of the DNA molecules to the gold substrate linker molecule was computed to be up to a few nN when the DNA molecules are fully stretched at high shear rates . for the first time , we calculated the relaxation time of DNA molecules in picoseconds ( ps ) and the hydrodynamic force up to a few nanoNewtons ( nN ) per base pair in a nanochannel flow . the velocity profiles in the solvent due to the presence of the tethered DNA molecules were found to be nonlinear only at high shear flow rates . free ssDNA molecules in a shear flow were observed to behave differently from each other depending upon their initial orientation in the flow field . both free and tethered DNA molecules are clearly observed to be stretching , rotating and relaxing . methods developed in this initial work can be incorporated into multiscale simulations including quantum mechanical , molecular and the microfluidic continuum regimes . the results may also be useful in extending existing macroscopic empirical models of DNA response dynamics in shear flows . 
A method for the depletion of red blood cells ( RBCs ) from whole blood at high volume flow rates is proposed and experimentally investigated . the approach exploits cell - screening effects at microchannel intersections with well - adjusted flow rates . it mimics blood flow phenomena previously observed and characterized in the microvascular system of living organisms . because of the purely hydrodynamic nature of the depletion mechanism , the structural features on the device can be significantly larger than the cell dimensions in contrast to micromachined filter devices based on physical retention of cells / particles . consequently , device fabrication is relatively straightforward and inexpensive . cell depleted liquid can be withdrawn from the device in a continuous operation mode , thus avoiding the principal limitation of finite filter capacity associated with size exclusion based approaches . the use of high-aspect-ratio channels allowed for a combination of both cell screening action and high fluidic throughput in the ml / min regime . the experimental data relating flow velocities , channel dimension , cell depletion efficiency , and overall yield can be qualitatively interpreted using an adapted theoretical model originally developed by fenton et al. eventually , the method could serve as a simple , highly versatile pre-analytical sample preparation module for the manipulation of the particle density of suspensions in a miniaturized total analysis system . 
the microfluidic oscillator is a new microscale actuator developed for flow control applications . these patented devices can produce a 325-mm-wide oscillating gas jet at high frequencies ( over <nUm> kHz ) and very low flow rates ( ∼ <nUm> l / min or ∼ <nUm> g / min ) . furthermore , microfluidic oscillators have no moving parts ; the jet oscillations depend solely on the internal fluid dynamics . In this work , the flowfield of a microfluidic oscillator is characterized using pressure transducers , water visualization , and pressure - sensitive paint the acoustic field and frequency spectrum were characterized for the oscillator at several flow rates . the results indicate that the external flowfield of the microfluidic oscillator is marked by two distinct operating regimes , separated by a transitional increase in turbulent noise . this work also demonstrates a significant advance in pressure - sensitive paint technology . new instrumentation was developed to resolve small - scale , time - resolved measurements of a high - frequency micro flowfield . A macro imaging system was used to provide a spatial resolution of approximately <nUm> mm per pixel and timeresolved , full - unsteady pressure measurements at oscillation frequencies up to <nUm> kHz . 
we explore the interplay of fluid inertia and fluid elasticity in planar entry flows by studying the flow of weakly elastic solutions through micro-fabricated planar contraction geometries . the small characteristic lengthscales make it possible to achieve a wide range of weissenberg numbers ( <nUm> < wi < <nUm> ) and reynolds numbers ( <nUm> < Re < <nUm> ) , allowing access to a large region of Wi-Re space that is typically unattainable in conventional macroscale entry flow experiments . experiments are carried out using a series of dilute solutions ( <nUm> < c / c* < <nUm> ) of a high molecular weight polyethylene oxide , in which the solvent viscosity is varied in order to achieve a range of elasticity numbers , <nUm> < el = wi / Re < <nUm> . fluorescent streak imaging and micro-particle image velocimetry ( m-PIV ) are used to characterize the kinematics , which are classified into a number of flow regimes including newtonian - like flow at low wi , steady viscoelastic flow , unsteady diverging flow and vortex growth regimes . progressive changes in the centreline velocity profile are used to identify each of the flow regimes and to map the resulting stability boundaries in Wi-Re space . the same flow transitions can also be detected through measurements of the enhanced pressure drop across the contraction / expansion which arise from fluid viscoelasticity . the results of this work have significant design implications for lab - on - a - chip devices , which commonly contain complex geometric features and transport complex fluids , such as those containing DNA or proteins . the results also illustrate the potential for using micro-fabricated devices as rheometric tools for measuring the extensional properties of weakly elastic fluids . 
we consider a situation commonly encountered in microfluidics : two streams of miscible liquids are brought at a junction to flow side by side within a microchannel , allowing solutes to diffuse from one stream to the other and possibly react . we focus on two model problems : ( i ) the transverse transport of a single solute from a stream into the adjacent one , ( ii ) the transport of the product of a diffusion - controlled chemical reaction between solutes originating from the two streams . our description is made general through a nondimensionalized formulation that incorporates both the parabolic poiseuille velocity profile along the channel and thermal diffusion in the transverse direction . numerical analysis over a wide range of the streamwise coordinate x reveal different regimes . close to the top and the bottom walls of the microchannel , the extent of the diffusive zone follows three distinct power law regimes as x is increased , characterized , respectively , by the exponents <nUm> / <nUm> , <nUm> / <nUm> , and <nUm> / <nUm> . simple analytical arguments are proposed to account for these results . 
frequency domain optical coherence tomography ( OCT ) with phase - resolved algorithm is presented to perform high - resolution ( <nUm> mm ) , cross-sectional imaging of structure and velocity in turbid gas - liquid slug flow inside a microtube and turbid liquid - liquid flow inside chaotic mixromixers : a barrier embedded kenics micromixer and a kenics micromixer . slug flow , the most common flow regime in microfluidic gas - liquid two - phase flow , consists of trails of bubbles separated by liquid slugs flowing concurrently and provides significant radial heat and mass transfer . since interfacial transports are proportional to the interfacial area between two phases , interfacial area concentration defined by interfacial area per unit mixture volume is an important parameter in a biochip with turbid biofluids . all the en face image techniques , such as light microscopy , experience errors in the interfacial area concentration measurement due to light refraction . In addition , they have overlapping depth information from the layers within a laser sheet or a depth of focus of the objective lens . OCT , however , can provide accurate interfacial area concentration in a microtube because it is a cross-sectional imaging technique which dispenses with the refraction correction in the radial direction . simultaneously , OCT can measure bubble velocity and velocity field inside liquid slugs . the radial liquid velocity was quantified without refraction correction . two toroidal vortices per liquid slug were visualized which is the essential mechanism for radial heat and mass transfers . the barrier embedded kenics micromixer and kenics micromixer are high performance chaotic micromixers with complex three - dimensional geometry . conventional techniques can not visualize a cross-sectional mixing pattern in such a complex micromixer . OCT , however , can image the pattern and , thereby , show mixing mechanisms . the barrier embedded kenics micromixer was proven to have a higher performance by comparison mixing patterns of two micromixers . 
overdamped magnetic nanorod - gyroscopes driven by a rotating magnetic field undergo a series of reorientations when sedimenting on top of a surface in a viscous liquid . by changing the amplitude and the rotation frequency of the driving magnetic field , the nanorod - gyroscope either synchronizes or desynchronizes with the field and rotates either around its long or short axis . the different regimes of motion are explained theoretically by coupling the nanorod - gyroscopes motion to the creeping flow equations of the surrounding fluid . it is shown that friction anisotropy plays an important role for the orientation of the nanorod - gyroscopes . 
the capillary kinetics of water inside homogenous PEG micro- to nanochannels formed by replica molding and UV - assisted bonding of a UV - curable PEG polymer is presented . the flow kinetics is measured and compared with that of heterogeneous PDMS channels supported on a glass substrate and having the same channel dimensions . potential applications to pumpless , analytical tools are tested by flowing a water stream inside a complicated microfluidic network by spontaneous capillary action . the use of a fluorescent solution verified the presence of a concave curvature and complete filling inside the whole complicated PEG channel . the flow rate inside the PEG channel is sufficiently high even for nanochannels with a hydraulic radius of <nUm> nm . the PEG channel is useful for pumpless , high - speed analytical devices and for studying flow kinetics or dynamics in the micro / nanoscale regime . 
we present a numerical study on the dynamics of magnetic micro- and nano-objects subjected to magnetic field gradients in conventional continuous - flow microfluidic devices . by a mixed finite - element / discrete - element approach we solve the equations of the field driven motion for magnetic nano-objects floating in liquids at very low reynolds numbers and compare the magnetic trapping efficiency of commercially available superparamagnetic microbeads to that of ferromagnetic nanowires . the drag force and the remanent magnetization of ferromagnetic nanowires are found to be responsible for the huge increase of their magnetic trappability whereas the slip - length associated with the navier boundary condition at the transition to the nanoscale regime is found to be a much less important parameter . 
electroosmotic flow in microfluidic systems is limited to the low reynolds number regime . As a result species mixing in the microchannel is inherently diffusion dominated , requiring both a long mixing channel and retention time to attain a homogeneous solution . In this paper we apply an external transverse electric field on the two - dimension microchannel , and discuss the influence of the intensity of the transverse electric field , the arrangement of the micro electrode , and the zeta potential on the micromixing . the results show that the method can effectively increase the mixing efficiency . increasing the external transverse electric field and the density of the micro electrode can increase the mixing efficiency obviously . the lower zeta potential leads to the better micromixing effect . 
this paper investigates the mixing characteristics of electrokinetically - driven flow in microchannels with different wavy surface configurations . numerical simulations are performed to analyze the influence of the wave amplitude and the length of the wavy section on the mixing efficiency within the microchannel . typically , straight channels have a poor mixing performance because the fluid flow is restricted to the low reynolds number regime , and hence mixing takes place primarily as a result of diffusion effects . however , the wavy surfaces employed in the current microchannels increase the interfacial contact area between the two species in the microchannel and therefore improve the mixing efficiency . the mixing performance is further enhanced by the application of a heterogeneous charge pattern on the wavy surfaces . the numerical results show that the heterogeneous charge pattern generates flow circulations near the microchannel walls . these circulations are shown to provide an effective enhancement in the mixing performance . overall , the present results show that the mixing performance is improved by increasing the magnitude of the heterogeneous surface zeta potential upon the wavy surface or by increasing the wave amplitude or the length of the wavy section in the microchannel . 
we present a new electrochemical velocimetry approach with direct electrical output that is capable of complete device - level integration . the steady reduction rate of a reversible redox species at an embedded microband working electrode is monitored amperometrically . only one working electrode of arbitrary width is required ; all three electrodes , including counter and reference electrodes , are integrated on - chip for complete miniaturization of the sensor . experimental results are complemented by a theoretical framework including a full 3D electrochemical model as well as empirical mass transfer correlations and scaling laws . when the sensor is operated in the convective / diffusive transport controlled mode , the output signal becomes a predictable function of velocity in two distinct regimes : ( i ) in the low velocity regime , the signal is directly proportional to flow rate , and ( ii ) in the high velocity regime , the signal scales as the cube root of the mean velocity . the proposed velocimetry technique is applicable to all practicable pressure - driven laminar flows in microchannels with known cross-sectional geometry . 
the use of two - phase flow in lab - on - chip devices , where chemical and biological reagents are enclosed within plugs separated from each other by an immiscible fluid , offers significant advantages for the development of devices with high throughput of individual heterogeneous samples . lab - on - chip devices designed to perform the polymerase chain reaction ( PCR ) are a prime example of such developments . the internal circulation within the plugs used to transport the reagents affects the efficiency of the chemical reaction within the plug , due to the degree of mixing induced on the reagents by the flow regime . it has been hypothesised in the literature that all plug flows produce internal circulation . this work demonstrates experimentally that this is false . the particle image velocimetry ( PIV ) technique offers a powerful non-intrusive tool to study such flow fields . this paper presents micro-PIV experiments carried out to study the internal circulation of aqueous plugs in two phase flow within <nUm> mm internal diameter FEP teflon tubing with FC-40 as the segmenting fluid . experiments have been performed and the results are presented for plugs ranging in length from <nUm> to <nUm> mm with a bulk mean flow velocity ranging from <nUm> to <nUm> mm / s . the results demonstrate for the first time that circulation within the plugs is not always present and requires fluidic design considerations to ensure their generation . 
the challenge of modeling low - speed rarefied gas flow in the transition regime is well known . In this paper , we propose a numerical solution procedure for the regularized <nUm> moment equations within a finite - volume framework . the stress and heat flux equations arising in the method of moments are transformed into the governing equations for the stress and heat flux deviators based on their first - order approximation . to model confined flows , a complete set of wall boundary conditions for the <nUm> moment equations are derived based on the maxwell wall - boundary model . this has been achieved by expanding the molecular distribution function to fourth - order accuracy in hermite polynomials . empirical correction factors are introduced into the boundary conditions and calibrated against direct simulation monte carlo data . the numerical predictions obtained from the regularized <nUm> moment equations and the Navier-Stokes-Fourier equations are compared with data generated using the direct simulation monte carlo method for planar couette flow . for a range of wall velocities and knudsen numbers ( <nUm> - <nUm> ) , the results indicate that the regularized <nUm> moment equations are in good qualitative agreement with the direct simulation monte carlo data . the results also highlight limitations that are caused by the use of a first - order expansion of the third moment . 
the lattice boltzmann simulation of a flow generated by an oscillating plate is conducted in a wide range of frequency variation <nUm> < ot < ∞ . the theoretically predicted transition from the viscoelastic ( ot ≪ <nUm> ) newtonian behavior to purely elastic non-Newtonian regime ( ot ≫ <nUm> ) has been demonstrated . the relation of the derived solutions to microfluidics ( high - frequency micro-resonators ) is shown on an example of a " plane oscillator " . 
microfluidic temperature gradient focusing ( TGF ) uses an axial temperature gradient to induce a gradient in electrophoretic flux within a microchannel . when balanced with an opposing fluid flow , charged analytes simultaneously focus and separate according to their electrophoretic mobilities . we present a theoretical and experimental study of dispersion in TGF . we model the system using generalized dispersion analysis that yields a 1-D convection - diffusion equation that contains dispersion terms particular to TGF . we consider analytical solutions for the model under uniform temperature gradient conditions . using a custom TGF experimental setup , we compare focusing measurements with the theoretical predictions . we find that the theory well represents the focusing behavior for flows within the taylor - aris dispersion regime . 
the preparation of microbubble suspensions is an important feature of medical engineering research . recently , co-axial electrohydrodynamic atomization was used in our laboratory for the first time to prepare microbubble suspensions . In this paper , using a model glycerol - air system , we investigate in detail the characteristics of this microbubbling process . modes of microbubbling are elucidated with respect to applied voltage and liquid and air flow rates . thus , a parametric plot is constructed to identify a liquid and gas flow rate regime , which allows continuous microbubbling . this map provides a basis for the selection of a suitable combination of liquid and gas flow rates particularly in relation to yield and bubble size . the mechanism of microbubbling in microfluidic systems is compared with that of microbubbling by co-axial electrohydrodynamic atomization to identify the advantages and the limiting factors of the latter . stability of microbubbles prepared by this method in terms of variation of diameter as a function of time is compared with previous literature on the dissolution of microbubbles with an air core and suggests the need for further work to stabilize the bubbles . 
the effects of fluid elasticity and channel dimension on polymeric droplet formation in the presence of a flowing continuous newtonian phase are investigated systematically by using different molecular weight ( MW ) poly(ethylene oxide ) ( PEO ) solutions and varying microchannel dimensions with constant orifice width ( w ) to depth ( h ) ratio ( w / h = <nUm> / <nUm> ) and w = <nUm> mm , <nUm> mm , <nUm> mm , and <nUm> mm . the flow rate is varied so that the mean shear rate is practically identical for all cases considered . relevant times scales include inertia - capillary rayleigh time tR = ( rmax3r / s1 / <nUm> , viscocapillary tomotika time tT = e0Rmax / σ and the polymer relaxation time η , where ρ is the fluid density of the dispersed phase , σ is the interfacial tension , l0 is the zero shear viscosity of the dispersed polymer phase , and rmax is the maximum filament radius . dimensionless numbers include the elasticity number e = lv / rmax2 , elastocapillary number ec = λ / tT , and deborah number , de = λ / tR , where v = e0 / ρ is the kinematic shear viscosity of the fluids . experiments show that higher MW boger fluids possessing longer relaxation times and larger extensional viscosities exhibit longer thread lengths and longer pinch - off times ( tp ) . the polymer filament dynamics are controlled primarily by an elastocapillary mechanism with increasing elasticity effect at smaller length scales ( larger e and ec ) . however , with weaker elastic effects ( i.e. , larger w and lower MW ) , pinch - off is initiated by inertia - capillary mechanisms , followed by an elastocapillary regime . A high degree of correlation exists between the dimensionless pinch - off times and the elasticity numbers . we also observe that higher elasticity number e yields smaller effective λ . based on the estimates of polymer scission probabilities predicted by brownian dynamics simulations for uniaxial extensional flows , polymer chain scission is likely to occur for ultrasmall orifices and high MW fluids , yielding smaller λ . finally , the inhibition of bead - on - a - string formation is observed only for flows with large deborah number ( de ≫ <nUm> ) . 
In microfluidic applications it has been observed that flows with spatial gradients in electrical conductivity are unstable under the application of sufficiently strong electric fields . these electrohydrodynamic instabilities can drive a nonlinear flow despite the low reynolds number . such flows hold promise as a simple mechanism for mixing fluids . In this work , the effect of a time periodic electric field on the instability is explored . the case where an electric field is applied across a diffuse interface of two fluids with varying electrical conductivity is considered . frequency - dependent behavior is found only in the regime where the instability growth rates are very slow and can not outpace mixing by molecular diffusion . improving mixing by modulation of the electric body force is not a viable strategy in this geometry . 
the applications of electrokinetics in the development of microfluidic devices have been widely attractive in the past decade . electrokinetic devices generally require no external mechanical moving parts and can be made portable by replacing the power supply by small battery . therefore , electrokinetic - based microfluidic systems can serve as a viable tool in creating a lab - on - a - chip ( LOC ) or micro-total analysis system ( mTAS ) for use in biological and chemical assays . mixing of analytes and reagents is a critical step in realizing lab - on - a - chip . this step is difficult due to the low reynolds numbers flows in microscale devices . hence , various schemes to enhance micro-mixing have been proposed in the past years . this review reports recent developments in the micro-mixing schemes based on DC and AC electrokinetics , including electrowetting - on - dielectric ( EWOD ) , dielectrophoresis ( DEP ) , and electroosmosis ( EO ) . these electrokinetic - based mixing approaches are generally categorized as either active or passive in nature . active mixers either use time - dependent ( AC or DC field switching ) or time - independent ( DC field ) external electric fields to achieve mixing , while passive mixers achieve mixing in DC fields simply by virtue of their geometric topology and surface properties , or electrokinetic instability flows . typically , chaotic mixing can be achieved in some ways and is helpful to mixing under large peclet number regimes . the overview given in this article provides a potential user or researcher of electrokinetic - based technology to select the most favorable mixing scheme for applications in the field of micro-total analysis systems . 
A theoretical approach for flow profile reconstruction in a rectangular microfluidic channel equipped with one or two microband electrodes working in generator - collector and generator - generator regimes was proposed by us previously ( ChemPhysChem <nUm> , <nUm> , 1581-1589 ; ChemPhysChem <nUm> , <nUm> , 482-487 ) . the purpose of the current study is to determine the ranges of dimensionkss parameters corresponding to the highest sensitivity of the minimized functional to the shape of the flow profile . by application of a cubic spline to approximate the flow profile and analysis of the least - squares functional , which can then be represented as a function of one variable , we derive the area of optimal method performance . thus , mathematical confirmation of our previous theoretical physical predictions could be obtained . 
motivated by its importance for microfluidic applications , we study the stability of jets formed by pressure - driven concentric biphasic flows in cylindrical capillaries . the specificity of this variant of the classical rayleigh - plateau instability is the role of the geometry which imposes confinement and poiseuille flow profiles . we experimentally evidence a transition between situations where the flow takes the form of a jet and regimes where drops are produced . we describe this as the transition from convective to absolute instability , within a simple linear analysis using lubrication theory for flows at low reynolds number , and reach remarkable agreement with the data . 
microfluidic devices are operated at a low-Reynolds-number flow regime such that the transportation and mixing of fluids are naturally challenging . there is still a great need to integrate fluid control systems such as pumps , valves and mixers with other functional microfluidic devices to form a micro-total-analysis-system . this study presents a new pneumatic microfluidic rotary device capable of transporting and mixing two different kinds of samples in an annular microchannel by using MEMS ( micro-electromechanical-systems ) technology . pumping and mixing can be achieved using a single device with different operation modes . the micropump has four membranes with an annular layout and is compact in size . the new device has a maximum pumping rate of <nUm> mL / min at a driving frequency of <nUm> Hz and an air pressure of <nUm> psi . experimental data show that the pumping rate increases as higher air pressure and driving frequency are applied . In addition , not only can the microfluidic rotary device work as a peristaltic pumping device , but it also is an effective mixing device . the performance of the micromixer is extensively characterized . experimental data indicate that amixing index as high as <nUm> % can be achieved . the developed microfluidic rotary device can be easily integrated with other microfluidic devices due to its simple and reliable PDMS fabrication process . the development of the microfluidic rotary device can be promising for micrototal-analysis-systems . 
new approaches to tissue engineering aim to exploit endogenous strategies such as those occurring in prenatal development and recapitulated during postnatal healing . defining tissue template specifications to mimic the environment of the condensed mesenchyme during development allows for exploitation of tissue scaffolds as delivery devices for extrinsic cues , including biochemical and mechanical signals , to drive the fate of mesenchymal stem cells seeded within . although a variety of biochemical signals that modulate stem cell fate have been identified , the mechanical signals conducive to guiding pluripotent cells toward specific lineages are less well characterized . furthermore , not only is spatial and temporal control of mechanical stimuli to cells challenging , but also tissue template geometries vary with time due to tissue ingrowth and / or scaffold degradation . hence , a case study was carried out to analyze flow regimes in a testbed scaffold as a first step toward optimizing scaffold architecture . A pressure gradient was applied to produce local ( nm - micron ) flow fields conducive to migration , adhesion , proliferation , and differentiation of cells seeded within , as well as global flow parameters ( micron-mm ) , including flow velocity and permeability , to enhance directed cell infiltration and augment mass transport . iterative occlusion of flow channel dimensions was carried out to predict virtually the effect of temporal geometric variation ( e.g. , due to tissue development and growth ) on delivery of local and global mechanical signals . thereafter , insights from the case study were generalized to present an optimization scheme for future development of scaffolds to be implemented in vitro or in vivo . although it is likely that manufacture and testing will be required to finalize design specifications , it is expected that the use of the rational design optimization will reduce the number of iterations required to determine final prototype geometries and flow conditions . As the range of mechanical signals conducive to guiding cell fate in situ is further elucidated , these refined design criteria can be integrated into the general optimization rubric , providing a technological platform to exploit nature 's endogenous tissue engineering strategies for targeted tissue generation in the lab or the clinic . 
we propose a theoretical method for reconstructing the shape of a hydrodynamic flow profile occurring locally within a rectangular microfluidic channel based on experimental currents measured at double microband electrodes embedded in one channel wall and operating in the generator - collector regime . the ranges of geometrical and flow parameters providing best conditions for the flow profile determination are indicated . the solution of convection - diffusion equation ( direct problem ) is achieved through the application of the specifically designed conformal mapping of spatial coordinates and an exponentially expanding time grid for obtaining accurate concentration and current distributions . the inverse problem ( the problem of flow profile determination ) is approached using a variational formulation whose solution is obtained by the ritz 's method . the method may be extended for any number of electrodes in the channel and / or different operating regimes of the system ( e.g. generator - generator ) . 
A microfluidic method for the in situ production of monodispersed alginate hydrogels using chaotic mixing is described . aqueous droplets comprising of alginate and calcium as a cross-linking agent were formed as an immiscible continuous phase , and then the alginate and calcium in the droplet came into contact and were rapidly mixed . gelation of the hydrogel was achieved in situ by the chaotic mixing of the droplets in the microfluidic device . important operating parameters included : the capillary number ( Ca ) and the flow rate of the continuous phase , which mainly influenced the formation of three distinctive flow regimes , such as fluctuation , stable droplets , and laminar flow . under the stable formation of droplets regime , monodispersed alginate microbeads having a narrow size distribution ( below <nUm> % of CV ) were produced in the microfluidic device and the size of the microbeads , ranging from <nUm> to <nUm> mm , could be easily modulated by varying the flow rate , viscosity , and interfacial tension . In addition , this approach can be applied to the encapsulation of yeast cells in alginate hydrogels with a high monodispersity . this simple microfluidic technique for the production of monodispersed hydrogels and encapsulation of biomolecules shows strong potential for use in biosensors , cell sensors , drug delivery systems , and cell transplantation applications . 
the application of cantilevered structures as check valves or flow sensors can provide new possibilities towards the integration of accurate sample preparation systems within a lab - on - a - chip . the cantilevers presented in this paper act as flaps enclosed within a channel in a direction perpendicular to the flow . this orientation allows simpler designs and easier integration of the valve or flow sensor within the microfluidic network . the cantilevers have been embedded in a microfluidic channel by low temperature full wafer adhesive bonding . In this way , electrodes , microchannels , microchambers and cantilevers can be fabricated and sealed at the same time at a wafer level . to the author 's knowledge , this is the first example of flap cantilevers embedded in a polymeric microfluidic channel . the mobility of the structure and the leakage are dependent on the size of the sealing gaps between the cantilever and the enclosing channel . In this paper , we present three different fabrication methods for a range of bottom sealing gaps from the micro to the nanometer size . the top sealing gap is determined by the adhesive bonding and is <nUm> nm wide . furthermore , various geometrical features have been introduced in order to optimize a valve or flow sensor . the characterization of the structures comprises measurements of the sensitivity of each cantilever design by obtaining their relative spring constant , measurements of their elastic and plastic working regimes and young 's modulus of the SU-8 . 
an experimental campaign was carried out studying laminar and turbulent heat transfer in uniformly heated smooth glass and rough stainless steel microtubes from <nUm> mm down to <nUm> mm . heat transfer in turbulent regime proved to be coherent - within experimental accuracy - with the classic gnielinski correlation for the nusselt number . for the laminar case , an anomalous drop in nusselt number for decreasing reynolds number was observed in the smooth glass tubes . As the stainless steel tubes manifested relatively normal diabatic behaviour in this regime ( apart from the evident influence of the thermal development region that increases heat transfer above the thermally fully developed value ) , the explanation of this unexpected diminution of the nusselt number must be sought in the dispersion of heat , put in externally through the thin film deposited on the glass tube outer surface , to peripheral attachments to the test section . this distorts the measured energy balance of the experiment , especially as the convective force of the fluid diminishes , resulting in lower nusselt numbers at lower reynolds numbers . 
microfluidic chips have been fabricated in pyrex glass to study electrokinetic pumping generated by a low - voltage ac bias applied to an in-channel asymmetric metallic electrode array . A measurement procedure has been established and followed carefully resulting in a high degree of reproducibility of the measurements over several days . A large coverage fraction of the electrode array in the microfluidic channels has led to an increased sensitivity allowing for pumping measurements at low bias voltages . depending on the ionic concentration a hitherto unobserved reversal of the pumping direction has been measured in a regime , where both the applied voltage and the frequency are low , vrms < <nUm> V and f < <nUm> kHz , compared to previously investigated parameter ranges . the impedance spectrum has been thoroughly measured and analyzed in terms of an equivalent circuit diagram to rule out trivial circuit explanations of our findings . our observations agree qualitatively , but not quantitatively , with theoretical electrokinetic models published in the literature . 
the two - phase flows in microchannels have many advantages in heat and mass transfer compared to single - phase flows . In particular , segmented flows such as bubbly and slug flows are often used in microfluidic devices . In the present study , experiments and lattice boltzmann simulations were carried out to study the gas - liquid flow in microchannels under various conditions . two types of mixer geometries were used , including the cross-shape and the converging shape channels . the bubble shape , bubble size , and formation mechanism were investigated for different flow rates and different mixer geometries . the simulation results and the experimental results were compared based on dimensionless numbers , and good agreement was found in general . different flow regimes with different bubble shapes were found depending on the capillary number of the flow . the simulation data confirmed that the breakup was induced by the pressure difference in the two phases for small capillary numbers . the geometry of the mixing section was also observed to have an impact on the size of the gas and liquid slugs . 
A technique for the measurement of the residence time distribution ( RTD ) in microfluidic devices is presented . the measurements were performed by an input - response technique monitoring a dye tracer concentration spectroscopically at the inlet and outlet of a microfluidic device . the measurement setup ensures the interchangeability of microfluidic devices and thus allows characterising of many different devices containing diverse mixing structures and microchannel geometries . since the experimental method is based on an external stimulus the measured RTD data show deviations from the actual RTD of the microfluidic device . these deviations are caused by the connected capillaries and their contribution to the overall RTD of the whole system . therefore , modelling of the RTD is necessary . two different models were applied in this study . the first one is the well - known axially dispersed plug flow model which is often used for macroscopic reactors . since this model was developed for plug flow processes , its applicability to the laminar flow regime of microfluidic devices is strongly limited . therefore , another empirical model was developed and applied in order to consider a wider range of different microstructures and process parameters . the RTDs of three different micromixers were investigated in a specified range of flow rates and modelled with the empirical model . based on these results the mixing performance and integral flow behaviour of the different reactors could be analysed and discussed . 
this paper presents a novel flow - through reverse transcription - polymerase chain reaction ( RT - PCR ) micro-reactor with optimized thermal and fluidic characteristics . we have designed a micro-reactor comprising a heating plate for different temperature zones and a fluidic chip with serpentine micro-channels . one feature of this chip system is the generation of a segmented flow for high - throughput analysis of PCR samples . we show the first successful reactions on the chip with different flow regimes and variations of PCR methods from a standard PCR to one - step RT - PCR reactions . the aim of the experiments was the detection of the HPV <nUm> DNA genome and of viral oncogene transcripts , respectively . both markers are of importance in medical diagnostics . 
this article reports on a proof - of - concept system composed of a droplet based surface plasmon resonance ( SPR ) system coupled to a surface acoustic wave ( SAW ) microfluidic plateform . it is now well established that surface based binding analyses such as SPR are highly influenced by the transport of analyte to the sensing surface . further , obtaining reliable equilibrium in flow cells to realize quantification studies is not straightforward . an original solution compared to generally used pressure driven flows is then proposed to favourably cope with these issues . efficiency of SAW microstreaming coupled to SPR biosensing is considered , in order to improve the accuracy of kinetic parameter estimation in mass transport limited regime and to realize reliable quantification studies . first , the droplet based SPR technique and its advantages are presented . then , the integration of the microstreaming on the system is discussed . streptavidin binding is then monitored in static mode and under SAW streaming mode . 
we use a mesoscopic simulation technique to study the transport of polymers in dilute solution flowing through a cylindrical tube . the simulations use an explicit solvent model to include all the relevant hydrodynamic couplings and a coarse grained ideal chain model for the polymers ( appropriate for systems near the theta temperature ) . for the interactions between the solvent and the tube wall we use a novel method that ensures continuity of the stress at the interface . we show that the results for the polymer drift velocity are independent of the degree of coarse graining . further , for the case where the size of the chains is small but not negligible compared to the tube radius , our results are in excellent agreement with experiment . however , they also show that in this regime , the " accelerated " drift , relative to the average solvent flow velocity , is described by the steric effect of the tube wall excluding the polymer center of mass from sampling the full cross section of the tube . hydrodynamic interactions have a negligible influence in this regime . consequently , the agreement between experiment and theories that approximates the former but includes the latter is fortunate . when the undisturbed polymer radius approaches or exceeds the tube radius , the hydrodynamic interactions do have a significant effect . they reduce the drift velocity , in qualitative agreement with theoretical predictions . the accelerated drift still approaches the maximum value , one would expect based on a poiseuille flow but more slowly than if one neglects hydrodynamics . finally , we propose an empirical fit that accurately describes data in the intermediate regime . 
In this paper , a detailed theoretical model is developed for studying the capillary filling dynamics of a non-Newtonian power - law obeying fluid in a microchannel subject to electrokinetic effects . special attention is devoted to model the effects of the electroosmotic influences in the capillary advancement process , variable resistive forces acting over different flow regimes , and the dynamically evolving contact line forces , in mathematically closed forms . As an illustrative case study , in which the flow parameters are modeled as functions of the hematocrit fraction in the sample , the capillary dynamics of a blood sample are analyzed . flow characteristics depicting advancement of the fluid within the microfluidic channel turn out to be typically non-linear , as per the relative instantaneous strengths of the capillary forces , electroosmotic forces and viscous resistances . non-trivial implications of the blood hematocrit level and the imposed electric field on the progression of the capillary front are highlighted , which are expected to be of significant consequence towards the dynamics of electroosmotically aided capillary filling processes of biofluidic samples . 
biochemical sample mixtures are commonly separated in batch processes , such as filtration , centrifugation , chromatography or electrophoresis . In recent years , however , many research groups have demonstrated continuous flow separation methods in microfluidic devices . such separation methods are characterised by continuous injection , real - time monitoring , as well as continuous collection , which makes them ideal for combination with upstream and downstream applications . importantly , in continuous flow separation the sample components are deflected from the main direction of flow , either by means of a force field ( electric , magnetic , acoustic , optical etc. ) , or by intelligent positioning of obstacles in combination with laminar flow profiles . sample components susceptible to deflection can be spatially separated . A large variety of methods has been reported , some of these are miniaturised versions of larger scale methods , others are only possible in microfluidic regimes . researchers now have a diverse toolbox to choose from and it is likely that continuous flow methods will play an important role in future point - of - care or in - the - field analysis devices . 
integration of microelectrodes in microfluidic devices has attracted significant attention during the past years , in particular for analytical detections performed by direct or indirect electrochemical techniques . In contrast there is a lack of general theoretical treatments of the difficult diffusion - convection problems which are borne by such devices . In this context , we investigated the influence of the confining effect and hydrodynamic conditions on the steady - state amperometric responses monitored at a microband electrode embedded within a microchannel . several convective - diffusive mass transport regimes were thus identified under laminar flow on the basis of numerical simulations performed as a function of geometrical and hydrodynamic parameters . A rationalization of these results has been proposed by establishing a zone diagram describing all the limiting and intermediate regimes . concentration profiles generated by the electrode across the microchannel section were also simulated according to the experimental conditions . their investigation allowed us to evaluate the thickness of the diffusive - convective layer probed by the electrode as well as the distance downstream from which the solution becomes again homogeneous across the whole microchannel section . experimental checks of the theoretical principles delineated here have validated the present results . experiments were performed at microband electrodes integrated in microchannels with aqueous solutions of ferrocene methanol under pressure - driven flow . 
gas microconvection is a strategic research area in transport phenomena since it is the basis for a wide range of miniaturized high - performance applications like microelectromechanical systems . the literature reveals that in the single - phase continuum regime , microconvection characteristics significantly differ from those in the conventionally sized channels . deviations from the expected behavior have been attributed to scaling effects that surface at the microscale . for most gas microflow applications that are in the slip or early transition regimes , the analysis is further complicated by rarefaction and compressibility effects . therefore , microslip flows are comprehensively reviewed to identify the implications of reported findings with respect to the validity of continuum - based models . based on the synthesis of studies , the need to better demark the continuum and free - molecular flow regimes is revealed , which necessitates the identification of important nonrarefaction scaling effects . this would enable the computationally inexpensive continuum models to be extended to higher knudsen numbers . the analyses suggest that early transition regime behavior is characterized more by conjugate nonrarefaction scaling effects and higher order slip boundary conditions than purely by rarefaction . 
leakage losses and overall increased power dissipation in the microprocessor are causing significant thermal , mechanical , and reliability problems . aside from the issue of cooling chip hot spots in order to reduce stress - inducing thermal gradients , the traditional challenge of quelling overall operating temperatures remains . conventional cooling methods are reaching their practical limits and new methods of lowering the operating temperature of microprocessors are being explored . microfluidics - based cooling schemes are one approach being considered . implementation of microchannels for forced convection at the chip level shows much promise , as the effective heat transfer surface area and attainable heat transfer coefficient are very favorable . A major design limitation to such an implementation is the pressure developed with such micro-flows , and the stresses that could result . In this study , multiple discrete microchannel configurations are analyzed computationally and compared in a cooling capability optimization sense , while total pressure drop across the flows is carefully considered . A single cooling channel over an energy source is split into two smaller channels , and so on , while total pressure drop is maintained constant , and specified such that all flows remain in the laminar regime . it is shown that for the configurations analyzed , there exists a definitive optimum cooling scheme . In addition , the effects of variation of channel height for the initially - determined optimum scheme are studied . it is shown that a slimmer design may be implemented with very little effect on cooling capability . 
A flow - focusing device with circular cross-section to produce monodispersed air bubbles and foams in several gelatine solutions is presented . four flow regimes were studied by varying the gas pressure : dripping , bi-disperse bubbly , bubbly and foam flows . bubble formation at the flow - focusing exit is discussed in detail and compared with that in rectangular microchannels . the bubble volume was shown to depend on the viscosity of the gelatine solution but not on the surface tension . for the bubbly flow , the frequency of bubble formation in this geometry was similar to that found in rectangular microchannels . for the foam flow the frequency was independent of the pressure . study in the outlet microchannel for the bubbly and foam flows showed that the gas flow followed a power law with the applied pressure . finally , the viscous resistance was measured and a pressure drop law was determined for each regime . 
the dynamics of liquid water transport through the gas diffusion layer ( GDL ) and into a gas flow channel are investigated with an ex situ experimental setup . liquid water is injected through the bottom surface of the GDL , and the through - plane liquid pressure drop , droplet emergence and droplet detachment are studied . the dynamic behaviour of water transport in and on the surface of the GDL is observed through fluorescence microscopy , and the through - plane liquid pressure drop is measured with a pressure transducer . with an initially dry GDL , the initial breakthrough of liquid water in the GDL is preceded by a substantial growth of liquid water pressure . post-breakthrough , droplets emerge with a high frequency , until a quasi-equilibrium liquid water pressure is achieved . the droplet emergence / detachment regime is followed by a transition into a slug formation regime . during the slug formation regime , droplets tend to pin near the breakthrough location , and the overall channel water content increases due to pinning and the formation of water slugs . droplets emerge from the GDL at preferential breakthrough locations ; however , these breakthrough locations change intermittently , suggesting a dynamic interconnection of water pathways within the GDL . the experiments are complemented by computational fluid dynamics ( CFD ) simulations using the volume of fluid method to illustrate the dynamic eruption mechanism . 
we describe the results of a numerical investigation of the dynamics of breakup of streams of immiscible fluids in the confined geometry of a microfluidic t-junction . we identify three distinct regimes of formation of droplets : squeezing , dripping and jetting , providing a unifying picture of emulsification processes typical for microfluidic systems . the squeezing mechanism of breakup is particular to microfluidic systems , since the physical confinement of the fluids has pronounced effects on the interfacial dynamics . In this regime , the breakup process is driven chiefly by the buildup of pressure upstream of an emerging droplet and both the dynamics of breakup and the scaling of the sizes of droplets are influenced only very weakly by the value of the capillary number . the dripping regime , while apparently homologous to the unbounded case , is also significantly influenced by the constrained geometry ; these effects modify the scaling law for the size of the droplets derived from the balance of interfacial and viscous stresses . finally , the jetting regime sets in only at very high flow rates , or with low interfacial tension , i.e. higher values of the capillary number , similar to the unbounded case . 
high quality factor of dynamic structures at micro and nano scale is exploited in various applications of micro electro-mechanical systems ( MEMS ) and nano electro-mechanical system . the quality factor of such devices can be very high in vacuum . however , when vacuum is not desirable or not possible , the tiny structures must vibrate in air or some other gas at pressure levels that may vary from atmospheric to low vacuum . the interaction of the surrounding fluid with the vibrating structure leads to dissipation , thus bringing down the quality factor . depending on the ambient fluid pressure or the gap between the vibrating and the fixed structure , the fluid motion can range from continuum flow to molecular flow giving a wide range of dissipation . the relevant fluid flow characteristics are determined by the knudsen number which is the ratio of the mean free path of the gas molecule to the characteristic flow length of the device . this number is very small for continuum flow and reasonably big for molecular flow . In this paper , we study the effect of fluid pressure on the quality factor by carrying out experiments on a MEMS device that consists of a double gimbaled torsional resonator . such devices are commonly used in optical cross-connects and switches . we only vary fluid pressure to make the knudsen number go through the entire range of continuum flow , slip flow , transition flow , and molecular flow . we experimentally determine the quality factor of the torsional resonator at different air pressures ranging from <nUm> Torr to <nUm> Torr . the variation of this pressure over six orders of magnitude ensures required rarefaction to range over all flow conditions . finally , we get the variation of quality factor with pressure . the result indicates that the quality factor , q , follows a power law , QaP -r , with different values of the exponent r in different flow regimes . In the second part of the paper , we propose the use of effective viscosity for considering velocity slip conditions in solving navier - stokes equation numerically . this concept is validated with analytical results for a simple case and then compared with the experimental results presented in this paper . the study shows that the effective viscosity concept can be used effectively even for the molecular regime if the air - gap to length ratio is sufficiently small ( h <nUm> / L < <nUm> ) . As this ratio increases , the range of validity decreases . 
this paper investigates the effect of rotation in split and recombination ( SAR ) mixing , one of the specific cases in which chaotic advection is applied to lamination , in a microchannel . three types of SAR micromixers were designed : No-R , Co-R , and Count-R . they are defined by their rotation effect and by the direction of the rotation . the mixing efficiency for the rotation effect was compared at various flow rates between <nUm> ml / min ( Re <nUm> ) and <nUm> ml / min ( Re <nUm> ) in an experiment and between <nUm> ml / min ( Re <nUm> ) and <nUm> ml / min ( Re <nUm> ) for numerical analysis . it is concluded that there are three regions , SAR dominant , mixed , and rotation dominant regions , following mixed regimes for the reynolds number when rotation is applied to SAR . In the mixed region , the SAR is distorted by rotation and the efficiency rapidly decreases as the reynolds number increases . In order to increase the mixing efficiency for a wide range of reynolds numbers in a microchannel , the second region ( mixed region ) must be diminished by optimizing the intensity of the rotation . 
microelectromechanical systems ( MEMS ) technology has provided the platform for the miniaturization of analytical devices for biological applications . beside the fabrication technology , the study and understanding of flow characteristics of fluid in micrometer or even nanometer scale is vital for the successful implementation of such miniaturized systems . microfluidics is currently under the spotlight for medical diagnostics and many other bio-analysis as its physical size manifested numerous advantages over lab - based devices . In this review , elementary concepts of fluid and its flow characteristics together with various transport processes and microchannel condition are presented . they are among the fundamental building block for the success in microfluidic systems . selected application examples include biological cell handling employing different schemes of manipulation and DNA amplification using different microreactor arrangement and fluid flow regime . 
dispersions of air in gelatine solutions were experimentally investigated in a <nUm> mm circular vertical tube coupled to a microfluidic device . air and gelatine solutions ( <nUm> % , <nUm> % and <nUm> % w / w ) were mixed in the microfluidic device to produce steady flows of microbubbles by controlling liquid and gas volumetric flow rates . A two - phase flow map and transition lines between flow regimes were examined . In the bubbling regime ( e.g. , low air fraction ) it was possible to produce mono and polydispersed micron - size air bubbles of controllable sizes . In the foam regime ( e.g. , high air fraction ) the foam structure mainly depended on the liquid flow rate . moreover , uniform foams moved as rigid bodies along the capillary tube , lubricated at the wall by the gelatine solution . 
background : A major stumbling block for researchers developing experimental models of mechanotransduction is the control of experimental variables , in particular the transmission of the mechanical forces at the cellular level . A previous evaluation of state of the art commercial perfusion chambers showed that flow regimes , applied to impart a defined mechanical stimulus to cells , are poorly controlled and that data from studies in which different chambers are utilized can not be compared , even if the target stress regimes are comparable . methods : this study provides a novel chamber design to provide both physiologically - based flow regimes , improvements in control of experimental variables , as well as ease of use compared to commercial chambers . this novel design achieves controlled stresses through five gasket designs and both single- and dual - flow regimes . results : the imparted shear stress within the gasket geometry is well controlled . fifty percent of the entire area of the <nUm> × <nUm> mm universal gasket ( gasket I , designed to impart constant magnitude shear stresses in the center of the chamber where outcome measures are taken ) , is exposed to target stresses . In the <nUm> mm diameter circular area at the center of the chamber ( where outcome measures are made ) , over <nUm> % of the area is exposed to the target stress ( ± <nUm> % ) . In addition , other gasket geometries provide specific gradients of stress that vary with distance from the chamber inlet . bench - top testing of the novel chamber prototype shows improvements , in the ease of use as well as in performance , compared to the other commercial chambers . the design of the chamber eliminates flow deviations due to leakage and bubbles and allows actual flow profiles to better conform with those predicted in computational models . conclusion : the novel flow chamber design provides predictable and well defined mechanical forces at the surface of a cell monolayer , showing improvement over previously tested commercial chambers . the predictability of the imparted stress improves both experiment repeatability as well as the accuracy of inter-study comparisons . carefully controlling the stresses on cells is critical in effectively mimicking in vivo situations . overall , the improved perfusion flow chamber provides the needed resolution , standardization and in vitro model analogous to in vivo conditions to make the step towards greater use in research and the opportunity to enter the diagnostic and therapeutic market . 
the design of novel food micro-structures aimed at the quality , health and pleasure markets will probably require unit operations where the scale of the forming device is closer to the size of the structural elements ( i.e. , 1-100 mm ) . one emerging possibility is microfluidics or devices that employ small amounts of fluids ( <nUm> <nUm> to <nUm> <nUm> l ) flowing in channels where at least one dimension is less than <nUm> mm . however , under these conditions , the predominant effects are not necessarily those present in conventional macroscopic unit operations . dominant physical effects at the microfluidic scale are introduced through the use of dimensionless numbers . different types of geometries to generate multi-phase flows in micro-channels , techniques and materials to construct the micro-devices , principally soft lithography and laser ablation , as well as methods used to modify surface properties of channels , are reviewed . the operation of micro-devices , the role of flow regimes , rheological behaviour of fluids in micro-channels and of transient time is discussed . finally , systems developed to generate emulsions and foams , fluid mixing and dispersion , and future applications of these devices in food processing and food analysis are presented . 
this study reports on the dynamics of droplets in the capillary regime induced by electrowetting - on - dielectric actuation . the configuration investigated allows for comparing the experimental results with respect to the predictions of brochard 's theoretical model ( brochard in langmuir <nUm> : <nUm> - <nUm> , <nUm> ) . firstly , side - view observations using stroboscopic recording techniques were used to measure and analyse droplet deformations as well as the front and rear apparent contact angles during motion . secondly , the influence of viscosity on the droplet velocity as a function of the applied voltage was studied . this has revealed that low reynolds number droplet motion can be described by the simple laminar viscous model of brochard . finally , the influence of the dielectric thickness on the droplet dynamics was studied . it is shown that droplet velocity is limited by a saturation effect of the driving electrostatic force and that this phenomenon is very similar to that occurring in static experiments . 
the predictive aggregate transport model for microfiltration is used in combination with optimum fluid mechanics and electrostatics to maximize recovery of a heterologous immunoglobulin ( IgG ) from transgenic goat milk . the optimization algorithm involved varying pH ( 6.8-9 ) , transmembrane pressure ( 2-4.5 psi ) , milk feed concentration ( 1-2X ) , membrane module type ( linear vs. helical design ) , and axial velocity ( reynolds number : 830-1170 ) . operation in the pressure - dependent regime at low uniform transmembrane pressures ( ≈ psi ) using permeate circulation in co-flow , at the pl of the protein ( <nUm> in this case ) was used to increase IgG recovery from less than <nUm> % to over <nUm> % . sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and attenuated total reflection fourier transform infrared spectroscopy of the microfiltration permeate samples confirmed that all the fat globules and most of the casein micelles were retained in the MF membrane whereas a large amount of the target IgG was transported through the membrane . transmembrane pressure and hence permeation flux was kept low ( ≈ <nUm> imh ) to maximize IgG membrane transport and thus recovery , due to a sparse deposit on the membrane which facilitated high solute transport . next , an analytical method was used to optimize the diafiltration process using the aggregate transport model , experimental target protein sieving coefficients and permeation flux ( baruah and belfort , <nUm> ) . the methodology reported here should be generalizable to the recovery of target proteins found in other complex suspensions of biological origin using the microfiltration process . 
we report a tri-phase microfluidic technology that can produce picoliter - sized biphasic droplets and geometrically anisotropic polymer microparticles . using a planar sheath - flowing regime , we generated biphasic droplets comprised of two immiscible organic fluids in co-flowing aqueous phase ; these droplets formed janus or core - shell structure by the balance of interfacial tensions among three liquid phases . subsequent photo - polymerization produced nonspherical polymer particles such as hemispheric particles , and shells with a pore on their surfaces . the size and shape of droplets and particles were controllable by varying flow conditions . A scale-up approach by multiple - channel integration was also demonstrated . 
this paper presents a novel flow - through reverse transcription - polymerase chain reaction ( RT - PCR ) microreactor with optimized thermal and fluidic characteristics . it integrates the steps of reverse transcription of the initially applied RNA sample and the amplification of specific DNA fragments of the cDNA formed . the microreactor comprises a heating plate with different temperature zones and an interchangeable fluidic chip with serpentine microchannels . the heating plate provides temperature zones for reverse transcription , hot start activation , denaturation , annealing and extension . the fluidic chip contains a serpentine micro channel with integrated features for segmented sample stream generation and dosing operations , which is guided over the temperature zones according to the thermal protocol of RT - PCR . reverse transcription is performed in an integrated microchannel section immediately before the amplification of the cDNA 's , generated from the primarily applied RNA sample . one feature of this chip system is the generation of a segmented flow for high - throughput analysis of RT - PCR samples . it is shown that RT - PCR reactions can be performed successfully in the microreactor with continuous and segmented flow regimes . the aim of the experiments was the detection of the HPV <nUm> DNA genome and of viral oncogene transcripts ( E6 / E7 ) , respectively . both markers are of importance in medical diagnostics and will be applied in further studies for the identification of oncogene positive cells in cell populations by means of flow - through in-situ RT - PCR . 
we demonstrate remote detection of nuclear magnetic resonance ( NMR ) with a microchip sensor consisting of a microfluidic channel and a microfabricated vapor cell ( the heart of an atomic magnetometer ) . detection occurs at zero magnetic field , which allows operation of the magnetometer in the spin - exchange relaxation - free ( SERF ) regime and increases the proximity of sensor and sample by eliminating the need for a solenoid to create a leading field . we achieve pulsed NMR linewidths of <nUm> Hz , limited , we believe , by the residence time and flow dispersion in the encoding region . In a fully optimized system , we estimate that for <nUm> s of integration , <nUm> × <nUm> protons in a volume of <nUm> mm3 , prepolarized in a 10-kG field , can be detected with a signal - to - noise ratio of ≈ <nUm> . this level of sensitivity is competitive with that demonstrated by microcoils in 100-kG magnetic fields , without requiring superconducting magnets . 
we study microfluidic systems in which mass exchanges take place between moving water droplets , formed onchip , and an external phase ( octanol ) . here , no chemical reaction takes place , and the mass exchanges are driven by a contrast in chemical potential between the dispersed and continuous phases . we analyze the case where the microfluidic droplets , occupying the entire width of the channel , extract a solute-fluorescein-from the external phase ( extraction ) and the opposite case , where droplets reject a solute-rhodamine-into the external phase ( purification ) . four flow configurations are investigated , based on straight or zigzag microchannels . additionally to the experimental work , we performed two - dimensional numerical simulations . In the experiments , we analyze the influence of different parameters on the process ( channel dimensions , fluid viscosities , flow rates , drop size , droplet spacing , ... ) . several regimes are singled out . In agreement with the mass transfer theory of young et al. ( young , W. ; pumir , A. ; pomeau , Y. phys. fluids A <nUm> , <nUm> , <nUm> ) , we find that , after a short transient , the amount of matter transferred across the droplet interface grows as the square root of time and the time it takes for the transfer process to be completed decreases as pe <nUm> / <nUm> , where pe is the peclet number based on droplet velocity and radius . the numerical simulation is found in excellent consistency with the experiment . In practice , the transfer time ranges between a fraction and a few seconds , which is much faster than conventional systems . 
the need of developing advanced micro-electro-mechanical systems ( MEMS ) has motivated the study of fluid - thermal flows in devices with micro-scale geometries . In many MEMS applications the knudsen number varies in the range from 10-2 to <nUm> . this flow regime can be treated neither as a continuum nor as a free molecular flow . In order to describe these flows it is necessary to implement the boltzmann equation ( BE ) or simplified kinetic model equations . the aim of the present work is to propose an efficient methodology for solving internal flows of binary gaseous mixtures in rectangular channels due to small pressure gradients over the whole range of the knudsen number . the complicated collision integral term of the BE is substituted by the kinetic model proposed by McCormack for gaseous mixtures . the discrete velocity method is implemented to solve in an iterative manner the system of the kinetic equations . even more the required computational effort is significantly reduced , by accelerating the convergence rate of the iteration scheme . this is achieved by formulating a set of moment equations , which are solved jointly with the transport equations . the velocity profiles and the flow rates of three different binary mixtures ( He-Ar , Ne-Ar and He-Xe ) in 2D micro-channels of various height to width ratios are calculated . the whole formulation becomes very efficient and can be implemented as an alternative methodology to the classical method of solving the navier - stokes equations with slip boundary conditions , which in any case is restricted by the hydrodynamic regime . 
the geometric and transport properties of trabecular bone are of particular interest for medical engineers active in orthopaedic applications and more specifically in hard tissue implantations . this article resorts to computational methods to provide some understanding of the geometric and transport properties of vertebral trabecular bone . A fuzzy distance transform algorithm was used for geometric analysis on the pore scale , and a lattice boltzmann method ( LBM ) for the simulation of flow on the same scale . the transport properties of bone including the pressure drop , elongation , and shear component of dissipated energy , and the tortuosity of the bone geometry were extracted from the results of the LBM flow simulations . whenever suitable , dimensionless numbers were used for the analysis of the data . the average pore size and distribution of the bone were found to be <nUm> mm and between <nUm> and <nUm> mm , respectively . the permeability of the flow in the cavities of the specific bone sample was found to be <nUm> × 10-8 m2 for the superior - inferior direction which was by a factor of <nUm> - <nUm> higher than the permeability in the other two anatomical directions ( anterior - posterior ) . these findings are consistent with experimental results found <nUm> years prior independently . tortuosity values approached <nUm> for the superior - inferior direction , and <nUm> and <nUm> for the other two perpendicular directions . the low tortuosities result mainly frorn the large bone porosity of <nUm> . the flow on the pore scale seems to be shear dominated but <nUm> per cent of the energy dissipation was because of elongational effects . the converging and diverging geometry of the bone explains the significant elongation and deformation of the fluid elements . the transition from creeping flow ( the darcy regime ) , which is of interest to vertebral augmentation and this study , to the laminar region with significant inertia effects took place at a reynolds number of about 1-10 , as usual for porous media . finally , the authors wish to advise the readers on the significant computational requirements to be allocated to such a virtual test bench . 
chaotic flow was generated in a smooth microchannel of a uniform width at arbitrarily low reynolds number with a polymer solution . the chaotic flow regime was characterized by randomly fluctuation three - dimensional velocity field and significant growth of the flow resistance . the chaotic flow leads to quite efficient mixing , which is almost diffusion independent . it is observed that for macromolecules , mixing time in this microscopic flow can be three to four orders of magnitude shorter than due to molecular diffusion . 
molecular dispersion is caused by both molecular diffusion and non-uniform bulk fluid motion . while the taylor - aris dispersion regime is the most familiar regime in microfluidic systems , an oft - overlooked regime is that of purely kinematic ( or ballistic ) dispersion . In most microfluidic systems , this dispersion regime is transient and quickly gives way to taylor - aris dispersion . In electrophoretic focusing methods such as temperature gradient focusing ( TGF ) , however , the characteristic time scales for dispersion are fixed , and focused peaks may never reach the taylor limit . In this situation , generalized taylor dispersion analysis is not applicable . A heuristic model is developed here which accounts for both molecular diffusion and advective dispersion across all dispersion regimes , from pure diffusion to taylor dispersion to pure advection . this model is compared to results from TGF experiments and accurately captures both the initial decrease and subsequent increase in peak widths as electric field strength increases . the results of this combined analytical and experimental study provide a useful tool for estimation of dispersion and optimization of TGF systems . 
double emulsion droplets encapsulating crystalline colloidal arrays ( AsC2 ) with a narrow size distribution were produced using an optofluidic device . the shell phase of the double emulsion was a photocurable resin that was photopolymerized downstream of the fluidic channel within <nUm> s after drop generation . the present optofluidic synthesis scheme was very effective for fabricating highly monodisperse spherical AsC2 that were made structurally stable by in situ photopolymerization of the encapsulating shells . the shell thickness and the number of core emulsion drops could be controlled by varying the flow rates of the three coflowing streams in the dripping regime . the spherical AsC2 confined in the shell exhibited distinct diffraction patterns in the visible range , in contrast to conventional film - type AsC2 . As a result of their structure , the spherical AsC2 exhibited photonic band gaps for normal incident light independent of the position on the spherical surface . this property was induced by heterogeneous nucleation at the smooth wall of the spherical emulsion drop during crystallization into a face - centered cubic ( fee ) structure . on the other hand , the solidified shells did not permit the penetration of ionic species , enabling the AsC2 to maintain their structure in a continuous aqueous phase of high ionic strength for at least <nUm> month . In addition , the evaporation of water molecules inside the shell was slowed considerably when the core - shell microparticles were exposed to air : it took approximately <nUm> h for a suspension encapsulated in a thick shell to evaporate completely , which is ∼ <nUm> times longer than the evaporation time for water droplets with the same volume . finally , the spherical AsC2 additionally exhibited enhanced stability against external electric fields . the spherical geometry and high dielectric constant of the suspension contributed to reducing the electric field inside the shell , thereby inhibiting the electrophoretic movement of the charged particles . 
to date , no published study has examined quantitatively the effect of geometric and dimensional idealization on prediction of the mechanical signals imparted by fluid drag to cell surfaces . we hypothesize that this idealization affects the magnitude and range of imparted forces predicted to occur at a subcellular level . hence , we used computational fluid dynamics to predict magnitudes and spatial variation of fluid velocity and pressure , as well as shear stress , on the cell surface in two- and three - dimensional models of actual and idealized pericellular canalicular geometries . furthermore , variation in actual pericellular space dimensions was analyzed statistically based on high - resolution transmitted electron micrographs ( TEM ) . accounting for the naturally occurring protrusions of the pericellular space delineating lamina limitans resulted in predictions of localized stress spikes on the cell surface , up to five times those predicted using idealized geometries . predictions accounting for actual pericellular geometries approached those required to trigger cell activity in in vitro models . furthermore , statistical analysis of TEM - based dimensions showed significant variation in the width of the canalicular space as well as the diameter of the cell process , both of which decrease with increasing distance from the cell body . for the first time to our knowledge , this study shows the influence of physiologic geometry per se on the nano-scale flow regimes in bone , and the profound influence of physiologic geometry on force magnitudes and variations imparted locally to cells through load - induced fluid flow . 
the straight microchannels used in conventional microfluidic devices yield a poor mixing performance because the fluid flow is restricted to the low reynolds number regime , and hence mixing takes place primarily as a result of diffusion . In an attempt to improve the mixing efficiency of pressure - driven microfluidic flows , the current study applies periodic velocity perturbations to the species flows at the microchannel inlet and incorporates a wavy - wall section within the mixing channel . numerical simulations are performed to analyze the respective effects on the mixing efficiency of the geometric amplitude of the wavy surface , the length of the wavy - wall section , and the strouhal number of the periodic velocity perturbations . overall , the results reveal that the mixing performance is improved by increasing the geometric wave amplitude or length of the wavy - wall section and by applying a strouhal number in the range <nUm> - <nUm> . 
despite widespread interest in combining laboratory - on - a - chip technologies with mass spectrometry (MS)-based analyses , the coupling of microfluidics to electrospray ionization (ESI)-MS remains challenging . we report a robust , integrated poly(dimethylsiloxane) microchip interface for ESI-MS using simple and widely accessible microfabrication procedures . the interface uses an auxiliary channel to provide electrical contact for the stable cone - jet electrospray without sample loss or dilution . the electric field at the channel terminus is enhanced by two vertical cuts that cause the interface to taper to a line rather than to a point , and the formation of a small taylor cone at the channel exit ensures subnanoliter postcolumn dead volumes . cone - jet mode electrospray was demonstrated for up to <nUm> % aqueous solutions and for extended durations . comparable ESI-MS sensitivities were achieved using both microchip and conventional fused silica capillary emitters , but stable cone - jet mode electrosprays could be established over a far broader range of flow rates ( from 50-1000 nL / min ) and applied potentials using the microchip emitters . this attribute of the microchip emitter should simplify electrospray optimization and make the stable electrospray more resistant to external perturbations . 
A variable - volume sample injector design is presented and evaluated for performing sample introduction protocols for carrying out miniaturised isotachophoresis ( ITP ) separations . the microdevice design features a wide bore sample loop channel connected to a narrower bore separation channel via a short injection channel angled at <nUm> ° . an additional side arm channel located at the injection point enabled a range of injection strategies , using a gravity - fed system , to be implemented and assessed . A model analyte was used to demonstrate the versatility of the injector design for low and high sample loading regimes suitable for concentrated and dilute sample solutions , respectively . 
this work demonstrates by direct visualization using confocal laser scanning microscopy that the application of electrical fields to a single - fixed , ion - permselective glass bead produces a remarkable complexity in both the coupled mass and charge transport through the bead and the coupled electrokinetics and hydrodynamics in the adjoining bulk electrolyte . the visualization approach enables the acquisition of a wealth of information , forming the basis for a detailed analysis of the underlying effects ( e.g. , ion - permselectivity , concentration polarization , nonequilibrium electroosmotic slip ) and an understanding of electrohydrodynamic phenomena at charge - selective interfaces under more general conditions . the device used for fixing single beads in a microfluidic channel is flexible and allows to investigate the electrohydrodynamics in both transient and stationary regimes under the influence of bead shape , pore size and surface charge density , mobile phase composition , and applied volume forces . this insight is relevant for the design of microfluidic / nanofluidic interconnections and addresses the ionic conductance of discrete nanochannels , as well as nanoporous separation and preconcentration units contained as hybrid configurations , membranes , packed beds , or monoliths in lab - on - a - chip devices . 
the standard direct simulation monte carlo ( DSMC ) simulation is not capable of producing statistically meaningful results for low Re flows which are often encountered in microflows . therefore , the non-isothermal information preservation ( IP ) algorithm is utilized in this study to predict the flow structure and the heat transfer characteristics of a microscale , slot , and confined jet impinging on a flat surface with uniform temperature boundary condition . the flow knudsen number based on the slot width is in the slip flow and the lower transition regime . the jet is impinging at jet - to - target surface gaps normalized by slot width ( H / W ) of <nUm> , <nUm> and <nUm> at a pressure ratio of <nUm> . the effects of impingement gap ( H / W ) on flow structure and heat transfer are investigated . the velocity , pressure and nusselt number distributions on the impingement target surface are presented . the results are compared to corresponding conventional large - scale values . 
an experimental study was conducted to investigate the characteristics of gas - liquid two - phase flow in <nUm> mm square microchannels thermoformed in polymer chips . polymer microfluidic chips were replicated using hot embossing of poly(methyl methacrylate ) ( PMMA ) with micromachined brass mold inserts . the thermoformed microchannels in polymer chips typically had greater surface roughnesses compared to microchannels etched in the silicon substrate . two more different polymer chips , a direct micromachined PMMA chip and a chip hot embossed with a LIGA nickel mold insert , were fabricated to compare surface characteristics of the sidewalls and bottoms of fabricated microchannels . deionized water and dry air were injected separately into the chips at superficial velocities of jL = <nUm> - <nUm> m / s for the liquid and jG = <nUm> - <nUm> m / s for the gas . capillary bubbly , plug , plug - annular , annular , and dry flows were observed in the microchannels . two - phase flow pattern maps and transitions between flow regimes were determined for fixed values of the homogeneous liquid fraction defined as bL = QL / ( QL + QG ) where q L and QG are the liquid and gas flow rates , and the liquid weber number fraction defined as gL = WeL / ( we L + WeG ) where WeL and WeG are the liquid and gas weber number . the surface roughness in submicron range showed minor effect in comparison with the previous work in terms of the gas - liquid two - phase flow patterns and transitions between flow regimes . dimensionless bubble sizes scaled by the width of observation microchannel were plotted against the homogeneous liquid fraction ( bL ) . A scaling law for the bubble length developed for the previous work with t-junctions was applicable to the present work used the cross junction for generation of segmented flow . with a fixed value of the fitting parameter , scaling law showed a good agreement with the experimental data . deviation of the scaled bubble length from predicted bubble length line and irregularity of bubble length with a fixed homogeneous liquid fraction increased with higher gas flow rates . 
spider silk threads are formed by the irreversible aggregation of silk proteins in a spinning duct with dimensions of only a few micrometers . here , we present a microfluidic device in which engineered and recombinantly produced spider dragline silk proteins eADF3 ( engineered araneus diadematus fibroin ) and eADF4 are assembled into fibers . our approach allows the direct observation and identification of the essential parameters of dragline silk assembly . changes in ionic conditions and pH result in aggregation of the two proteins . assembly of eADF3 fibers was induced only in the presence of an elongational flow component . strikingly , eADF4 formed fibers only in combination with eADF3 . on the basis of these results , we propose a model for dragline silk aggregation and early steps of fiber assembly in the microscopic regime . 
for screening the conditions for a reaction by using droplets ( or plugs ) as microreactors , the composition of the droplets must be indexed . indexing here refers to measuring the concentration of a solute by addition of a marker , either internal or external . indexing may be performed by forming droplet pairs , where in each pair the first droplet is used to conduct the reaction , and the second droplet is used to index the composition of the first droplet . this paper characterizes a method for creating droplet pairs by generating alternating droplets , of two sets of aqueous solutions in a flow of immiscible carrier fluid within PDMS and glass microfluidic channels . the paper also demonstrates that the technique can be used to index the composition of the droplets , and this application is illustrated by screening conditions of protein crystallization . the fluid properties required to form the steady flow of the alternating droplets in a microchannel were characterized as a function of the capillary number Ca and water fraction . four regimes were observed . At the lowest values of Ca , the droplets of the two streams coalesced ; at intermediate values of Ca the alternating droplets formed reliably . At even higher values of Ca , shear forces dominated and caused formation of droplets that were smaller than the cross-sectional dimension of the channel ; at the highest values of Ca , coflowing laminar streams of the two immiscible fluids formed . In addition to screening of protein crystallization conditions , understanding of the fluid flow in this system may extend this indexing approach to other chemical and biological assays performed on a microfluidic chip . 
this article presents a review of adiabatic two - phase flow in minichannels and microchannels . differences between them are identified and explained based on this review and our own research . several channels of decreasing diameter were used in our experiments to determine the effect of the channel size on the two - phase flow of nitrogen gas and water . the effect of channel geometry was examined by characterizing the two - phase flow in a circular and square microchannel of similar size . only slug flow was observed in the microchannels . four new sub-classes of slug flow were subsequently defined . A new correlation was developed for the time - averaged void fraction data in the microchannels . the two - phase pressure drop in microchannels was predicted by treating the two phases as being separate with a large velocity difference . regarding the effect of microchannel geometry , the transition boundaries on the two - phase flow regime maps were shifted for the slug flow subcategories . 
integrating insulator - covered electrodes into a microfluidic flow focusing device ( FFD ) we demonstrate enhanced flexibility and control of the flow of two non-miscible liquids based on electrowetting ( EW ) . In the parameters space , determined by liquid inlet pressures , we identify a specific region where drops can only be generated and addressed via EW . In this regime we show that the size distribution and the frequency of drop generation can be controlled by the applied voltage and the width of voltage pulses . moreover it turns out that with EW the drop size and the frequency can be tuned independently . finally we show that the same drop generation phenomena can also be observed in the presence of surfactants . 
physiological models have demonstrated that cells undergo a cyclic regimen of hydrostatic compression and fluid shear stress within the lacunar - canalicular porosity of bone . A new modular bioreactor was designed to incorporate both perfusion fluid flow and hydrostatic compression in an effort to more accurately simulate the mechanical loading and stress found in natural bone in vivo . the bioreactor design incorporated custom and off - the - shelf components to produce levels of mechanical stimuli relevant to the physiologic range , including hydrostatic compression exceeding <nUm> kPa and perfusion shear stress of <nUm> dyne / cm2 . preliminary findings indicated that the novel system facilitated the viable growth of cells on discrete tissue engineering scaffolds . the bioreactor has established an experimental platform for ongoing investigation of the interactive effect of perfusion fluid flow and hydrostatic compression on multiple cell types . 
A theoretical investigation is presented that characterizes the interaction dynamics of a double deoxyguanonsine molecular system , where two guanine bases are coupled via a sugar - phosphate backbone that is bound to the surface of silicon . molecular dynamical simulations show that the influence of the coupling between the guanine bases ( i.e. , as compared with individual deoxyguanonsine molecules ) leads to a significant increase of the absorption intensity from microwave to infrared ( IR ) frequencies . furthermore , these results show that the strong coupling between the guanine bases leads to a much larger number of distinguishable vibrational modes at frequency below the IR at ∼ <nUm> cm-1 . these effects also produce double - peak features in the Far-IR absorption intensity , which represent a splitting of the individual peaks associated with a single deoxyguanonsine molecule . guanine base coupling also leads to a general shifting of all the absorption peaks towards the terahertz frequency regime ( i.e. , ∼ <nUm> THz and below ) , which is also accompanied by a reduction of the absorption intensity as one progresses to longer wavelengths . most importantly , this interaction phenomenon creates additional spectral features , which may be useful in a long - wavelength optics - based technique for DNA sequencing 
we experimentally study the formation and evolution of threads containing more viscous liquids surrounded by less viscous , immiscible liquids through hydrodynamic focusing in square microchannels . over a large range of viscosities and interfacial tensions , five characteristic regimes of flow behavior are identified : threading , jetting , dripping , tubing , and displacement . we locate the boundaries between these regimes on a flow map based on the capillary number of each fluid . In the jetting and the dripping regimes , the droplet size is measured and related to fluid properties , flow parameters , and geometry . the critical thread length before jetting droplets and the critical length of a viscous tail before breakup in dripping are also examined . this study classifies and defines regimes of thread instabilities that can be used to produce supra- and subchannel size viscous droplets in an elementary microfluidic geometry . 
apoptosis is a complex and finely controlled cell death process of great relevance in tissue homeostasis and pathogenesis . the majority of classical apoptotic features can be examined by flow as well as image cytometry . therefore , cytometry has been used as a technology of choice in studies of tumor cell demise . As search for new and more effective anticancer agents is still ongoing , there is undoubtedly a need for further development of high - throughput screening platforms . assays that allow multivariate characterization of cell death events in response to novel anticancer regimens are of particular significance . In this context , patented DNA - binding SYTO probes are gaining increasing interest as easy to use markers of caspase - dependent cell death . they are proving convenient for tracking apoptosis in diverse cell lines as well as in primary tumor samples . In this review , we outline most recent developments in the use of SYTO probes in cell necrobiology . we also present pilot characterization of novel SYTO orange stains ( SYTO80 and SYTO81 ) and discuss their potential applications in cytometry of apoptosis . finally , we provide a future outlook on SYTO probes in cytometric and microfluidics ( lab - on - a - chip ) high content analysis applications . 
we study the crossover of a quasi-two - dimensional fermi gas trapped in the radial plane from the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer ( BCS ) regime to the bose - einstein condensation ( BEC ) regime by crossing a wide feshbach resonance . we consider two effective two - dimensional hamiltonians within the mean - field level , and calculate the zero - temperature cloud size and number density distribution . for a model <nUm> hamiltonian with renormalized atom - atom interaction , we observe a constant cloud size for arbitrary detunings . for a model <nUm> hamiltonian with renormalized interactions between atoms and dressed molecules , the cloud size deceases from the BCS to BEC side , which is consistent with the picture of BCS - BEC crossover . this qualitative discrepancy between the two models indicates that the inclusion of dressed molecules is essential for a mean - field description of quasi-two - dimensional fermi systems , especially on the BEC side of the feshbach resonance . 
magnetohydrodynamic mixing of two fluids in an annular microchannel is modelled as a two - dimensional laminar convection - diffusion problem and examined using asymptotic analysis and numerical simulation . the time T required for mixing of a plug of solute depends on the peclet number pe and on the geometry of the annulus . three scaling regimes are identified : purely diffusive , taylor - dispersive , and convection - dominated ; each has a characteristic power - law dependence of T upon pe . consequences of these results for optimal micromixer design are discussed . 
biologically active heart valves ( tissue engineered and recellularized tissue - derived heart valves ) have the potential to offer enhanced function when compared to current replacement value therapies since they can possibly remodel , and grow to meet the needs of the patient , and not require chronic medication . however , this technology is still in its infancy and many fundamental questions remain as to how these valves will function in vivo . it has been shown that exposing biologically active tissue constructs to pulsatile pressures and flows during in vitro culture produces enhanced extracellular matrix protein expression and cellularity , although the ideal hydrodynamic conditioning regime is as yet unknown . moreover , in vitro organ - level studies of living heart valves aimed at studying the remodeling processes require environments that can accurately reproduce in vivo hemodynamics under sterile conditions . to this end , we have developed a system to study the effects of subjecting biologically active heart valves to highly controlled pulsatile pressure and flow waveforms under sterile conditions . the device fits inside a standard incubator and utilizes a computer - controlled closed loop feedback system to provide a high degree of control . the mean pressure , mean flow rate , driving frequency , and shape of the pulsatile pressure waveform can be changed automatically in order to simulate both physiologic and nonphysiologic hemodynamic conditions . extensive testing and evaluation demonstrated the device 's ability to subject a biologically active heart valve to highly controlled pulsatile waveforms that can be modulated during the course of sterile incubation . 
enhancing species mixing in microfluidic applications is key to reducing analysis time and increasing device portability . mixing in electroosmotic flows is usually diffusion - dominated requiring extended channel lengths and retention times . recent numerical studies have indicated that the introduction of electrically charged surface heterogeneities may augment mixing efficiencies by creating localized regions of flow circulation . In this study , we experimentally visualize the effects of surface charge patterning and develop an optimized electrokinetic micro-mixer applicable to the low reynolds number regime . using the optimized micro-mixer , mixing efficiencies were improved between <nUm> % and <nUm> % for applied potentials ranging from <nUm> - <nUm> V / cm when compared with the homogeneous case . for <nUm> % mixture , this equates to a potential decrease in required mixing channel length of up to <nUm> % for flows with peclet numbers between <nUm> and <nUm> . 
burning behavior of small - scale wood crib was studied by a serial of cone calorimeter tests . the heat release rate curves of these small wood cribs were different due to porosity factor and this shows that the control condition switches from one to another . the burning of some crib with small porosity factors was self - extinguished in fixed flow rate of air supply in cone calorimeter . these results were compared with gross 's studies . the switch point of porosity - controlled and surface area controlled burning regime is different from gross 's result . 
by injecting negative ions in superfluid he4 in the zero - temperature limit ( T ≤ <nUm> K ) , we have generated tangles of quantized vortex line with negligible large - scale flow . for this quantum regime of superfluid turbulence , the vortex line length L was found to decay at late time t as lat-1 , the prefactor being independent of the initial value of L . the corresponding effective kinematic viscosity is <nUm> κ , where κ is the circulation quantum . At T > <nUm> K , a jet of ions generates quasiclassical tangles identical to those produced by mechanical means . 
mask error enhancement factor ( MEEF ) plays an increasingly important role in the DFM flow required to continue shrinking designs in the low-k1 lithography regime . the ability to understand and minimize MEEF during design optimization and RET application is essential to obtain a usable process window . the traditional limited - cutline approach to analyzing and characterizing MEEF is no longer sufficient to accommodate increasing design complexity . In this paper , we present a new method of edge - based MEEF for analyzing and characterizing MEEF - based hot spots that overcomes the limitations of the traditional cutline approach . application of the technique to analyze full - field pixel - based two dimensional ( 2D ) MEEF color maps of several different design clips is explained . process window ( PW ) is the most important metric in lithography simulations for evaluating the performance of a given RET solution . traditionally , process window calculation assumes a perfect mask , with no mask errors or corner rounding . In a low k1 regime , MEEF increases enough that mask errors can no longer be ignored in PW evaluation . A method of calculating " MEEF - aware " common process windows and creating a MEEF - aware process variation ( PV ) band , including mask bias , is presented , and wafer image variability is examined under several process variations , including dose , defocus and mask error . results of MEEF - aware source - mask optimization ( SMO ) and design rule exploration using inverse lithography technology ( ILT ) are also presented . 
In this paper a numerical simulation technique has been used to evaluate the possibilities of cyclone application in molten aluminium processing by determining the fluid flow for flow velocities of <nUm> m / s , <nUm> m / s and <nUm> m / s ; particle behavior for discrete particle sizes in the range of 20-100 mm ; particle densities of 2660-3980 kg / m3 ; and the collection efficiency of the cyclone . the geometrical aspects have been discussed . the results show that the cyclone concept can be effectively used as an alternative method to remove the impurities from a stream of molten aluminium in a wide range of flow regimes . A pilot installation is being built for validation of the used model in terms of collection efficiency ; and for casting trials [1] . 
pressure drop is an important parameter in the process design and performance of trickle bed reactors as it affects the energy requirements and hence the operating cost and sizing of the reactor . various hydrodynamic factors that influence the two - phase pressure drop of a trickle bed reactor when newtonian liquid phases are involved include gas flow rate , liquid flow rate , surface tension of the liquid phase , viscosity of the liquid phase , and bed characteristics such as porosity and sphericity of the packing material . for viscoinelastic fluid flow consistency index K and flow behavior index n are observed to affect the pressure drop significantly , whereas , for viscoelastic fluids , fluid elasticity leads to higher pressure drop . In the present study the effects of various parameters ( involving bed characteristics and liquid - phase properties ranging from simple water - like newtonian fluids to complex viscoelastic non-Newtonian fluids ) on two - phase pressure drop are investigated . A wide range of correlations for two - phase pressure drop are available in the literature , however , none of the correlations seem to be applicable over a wide range of bed characteristics and fluid - phase properties as investigated in the present study . the experimental observations indicated that the pressure drop rises significantly when the flow regime changes from low to high interaction . hence the data corresponding to low- and high - interaction regimes are treated separately to yield suitable correlations for newtonian and non-Newtonian fluids . the correlations developed predicted the literature data for newtonian liquid -phases to within ± <nUm> % . the correlations are extended to predict two - phase pressure drop for viscoinelastic and viscoelastic liquid phases . 
creep experiments were conducted on single crystals of very high purity aluminum to evaluate the validity of the harper - dorn region of flow which occurs at very low stresses and high homologous temperatures . the results confirm the existence of a different flow process under these conditions but with a stress exponent closer to ∼ <nUm> rather than <nUm> . measurements show that the dislocation density within this low stress region varies with stress in a manner consistent with the behavior anticipated from an extrapolation of data reported in the regime of conventional power - law creep at high stresses . all of the experimental results are in reasonable agreement with earlier published data , including with the original data of harper and dorn when their results are plotted without incorporating a threshold stress . 
this paper describes two - phase flow pattern and pressure drop characteristics during the absorption of CO2 into water in three horizontal microchannel contactors which consist of Y - type rectangular microchannels having hydraulic diameters of <nUm> , <nUm> and <nUm> μ m , respectively . with the help of a high - speed photography system , flow patterns such as bubbly flow , slug flow ( including two sub-regimes , taylor flow and unstable slug flow ) , slug - annular flow , churn flow and annular flow were observed in these microchannels . the applicability of the currently available correlations for describing flow pattern transitions in microchannels has been examined . generally , the predicting performance of these correlations deteriorates as the channel diameter further reduces . toward solving this discrepancy , an empirical correlation based on the superficial weber numbers was developed to interpret the transition from taylor flow to unstable slug flow in three microchannels . taylor bubble formation process in microchannels was found to be in the squeezing regime at lower superficial liquid velocities ( Ca ranging from <nUm> to <nUm> ) while the transition to the dripping regime was observed at the highest superficial liquid velocity of <nUm> m / s . lengths of taylor bubbles formed in the squeezing regime can be well represented by the scaling relation proposed by garstecki et al. [ formation of droplets and bubbles in a microfluidic t-junction-scaling and mechanism of break-up . lab on a chip , <nUm> , 437-446 ] . for flow patterns including slug - annular flow , annular flow and churn flow , a simple analysis based on the separated flow model has been performed in order to reveal the observed effect of the superficial liquid velocity on two - phase frictional multiplier in the present microchannels . then , reasonable correlations for the prediction of two - phase frictional pressure drop under these flow patterns were suggested . 
we adress the question of the stability of a confined coflowing jet at low reynolds number in various geometries . our study is motivated by recent experiments in microfluidic devices . when immiscible fluids flow in microchannels , either monodisperse droplets or parallel flows are obtained depending upon the flow rate of the aqueous phase and the oil phase . In these experiments , the confining and the shape of the geometry play a fundamental role . In a previous paper , we analyzed the stability of the jet in the framework of the lubrication approximation at low reynolds number in a cylindrical geometry , and we related the transition between the droplets regime and the jet regime to the absolute - convective transition of the rayleigh plateau instability . In this work , the effect of the channel geometry and the jet position within the microfluidic device are discussed . new flow patterns are pointed out . bidimensional jets are encountered in square and rectangular geometry . contrary to jets occuring in circular geometry , these two - dimensional jets are absolutely stable . focusing on situations where the inner fluid is more viscous than the outer one , we evidence a range of parameters where droplets are produced through a blocking and pinching mechanism . In this particular case , the flow is unstable , the growing perturbations are convected upstream . this induces the clogging of the channel by the internal phase and its pinching by the external one . In a future presentation we will give a comparison between this model and experimental data . 
microfluidics has shown promise as a new platform for assisted reproduction . to assess the potential of microfluidics for fertilization , we studied sperm and fluid motion in microchannels to better understand the flow characteristics in a microfluidic device , how sperm interacted with this flow , and how sperm - oocyte attachment occurs in the device . there is a threshold fluid velocity where sperm transition from traveling with the fluid to a regime in which the sperm can move independently of the flow . A significant population of sperm remained in the inlet well area . based on the lack of progressive forward movement , it was presumed that these sperm may have defects . also of extreme interest was the tendency of sperm to travel along surface contours . these observations provide an improved understanding of sperm motion in microchannels and provide a basis for improved device designs that take advantage of the sperm / flow and sperm / geometry interactions . 
breast cancer is the leading cause of cancer deaths among non-smoking women worldwide . At the moment the treatment regime is such that patients receive different chemotherapeutic and / or hormonal treatments dependent on the hormone receptor status , the menopausal status and age . however , in vitro sensitivity testing of tumor biopsies could rationalize and improve the choice of chemo- and hormone therapy . lab - on - a - chip devices , using microfluidic techniques , make detailed cellular analysis possible using fewer cells , enabling working with a patients ' own cells and performing chemo- and hormone sensitivity testing in an ex vivo setting . this article describes the development of two microfluidic devices made in poly(dimethylsiloxane) ( PDMS ) to validate the cell culture properties and analyze the chemosensitivity of MCF-7 cells ( estrogen receptor positive human breast cancer cells ) in response to the drug staurosporine ( SSP ) . In both cases , cell viability was assessed using the life - stain Calcein-AM ( CAAM ) and the death dye propidium iodide ( PI ) . MCF-7 cells could be statically cultured for up to <nUm> days in the microfluidic chip . A <nUm> min flow with SSP and a subsequent <nUm> h static incubation in the incubator induced apoptosis in MCF-7 cells , as shown by a disappearance of the aggregate - like morphology , a decrease in CAAM staining and an increase in PI staining . this work provides valuable leads to develop a microfluidic chip to test the chemosensitivity of tumor cells in response to therapeutics and in this way improve cancer treatment towards personalized medicine . 
understanding electroosmotic flow in microchannels is of both fundamental and practical significance for the design and optimization of various microfluidic devices to control fluid motion . electroosmotic flows in microfluidic systems are restricted to the low reynolds number regime , and mixing in these systems becomes problematic due to negligible inertial effects . to enhance the species mixing effect , the current study presents a numerical investigation of steady - state electroosmotic flow mixing in smooth microchannels , channels patterned with surface blocks , channels patterned with heterogeneous surfaces , as well as pulsating electroosmotic flow . the lattice boltzmann equations , which recover the nonlinear poisson - boltzmann equation , the navier - stokes equation including the external force term , and the diffusion equation , were solved to obtain the electric potential distribution in the electrolyte , the velocity field , and the species concentration distribution , respectively . the simulation results confirm that wall blocks , heterogeneous surfaces , and electroosmotic pulsating flow can all change the flow pattern and enhance mixing in microfluidic systems . In addition , it is shown that pulsating flow provides the most promising method for enhancing the mixing efficiency . 
with the development of micro / nano-devices , low speed rarefied gas flows have attracted significant research interest where successful numerical methods for traditional high speed flows , including the direct simulation monte carlo method , become computationally too expensive . As the knudsen number can be up to the order of unity in a micro / nano flow , one approach is to use continuum - based methods including the Navier-Stokes-Fourier ( NSF ) equations , burnett / super burnett equations , and moment models . limited success has been achieved because of theoretical difficulties and / or numerical problems . the recently developed lattice boltzmann equation ( LBE ) offers a fundamentally different approach which is close to kinetic methods but with a significantly smaller computational cost . however , success of LBE methods for rarefied gas motion has been mainly on isothermal flows . In this paper , thermal rarefied gas flows are investigated . due to the unique features of micro / nano flows , a simplified thermal lattice boltzmann model with two distribution functions can be used . In addition , kinetic theory boundary conditions for the number density distribution function can be extended to construct a thermal boundary condition . the model has been validated in the slipflow regime against solutions of the NSF equations for shear and pressure driven flows between two planar plates . it is shown that the present thermal LBE model can capture some unique flow characteristics that the NSF equations fail to predict . the present work indicates that the thermal lattice boltzmann model is a computationally economic method that is particularly suitable to simulate low speed thermal rarefied gas flows . 
magnetic nanocarriers play an increasing role in various biomedical applications such as the separation of magnetically ' tagged ' DNA , drug delivery or identification of biological species . recent developments in nanotechnology allow the fabrication of both artificial nanocarriers and magnetic separation devices which may achieve great performances at an incredibly small - volume sample handling . however , as the sizes of magnetic carriers and separation devices diminish , important theoretical and experimental challenges may occur mainly due to the important variations of the surface - to - volume ratio . under these circumstances , intrinsic properties of individual carriers and their influence on functionality and performances of the magnetic manipulation have to be investigated with a higher degree of accuracy . In this paper , we present the state - of - the - art techniques for extracting accurate information about individual magnetic entities from magnetic measurements performed on ordered arrays or clusters of magnetic nano-objects of various dimensionalities and geometries . As the mutual magnetic interactions may be responsible for collective effects , both analytical and numerical techniques for evaluating the mutual interactions between magnetic nanoparticles and nanowires are reviewed , special emphasis being put on the dimensionality of their assemblages . As the efficiency of the manipulation and capture of individual magnetic carriers in magnetic confinement devices depend strongly on their size , the theoretical description of the motion of magnetic particles under various conditions of flow and field configurations become very important especially with the transition to the nanoscale regime . the equations of motion of magnetic nanocarriers in continuous - flow microfluidic devices are reviewed and some solutions for superparamagnetic interacting clusters , non-interacting beads and ferromagnetic contiguous or codebar nanowires are presented . the influence of both carrier size and transition toward the nanoscale regime on the trappability of some magnetic nanocarriers is evaluated in terms of finite - length navier boundary conditions and applied in order to compare the motion of superparamagnetic beads and ferromagnetic nanowires in conventional continuous - flow magnetic confinement devices . 
this paper reports experimental investigations on the droplet formation of deionized water and a nanofluid in a heat - induced microfluidic flow focusing device . besides the effect of temperature , the effects of nanoparticle suspension ( nanofluid ) and the flow rate of aqueous fluid on the droplet formation and size manipulation were studied . At constant flow rates of the two liquids , three different droplet breakup regimes were observed and their transition capillary numbers as well as temperatures were identified . the heat generated by an integrated microheater changes the droplet formation process . increasing the temperature enlarges the size of the droplets significantly . these results also demonstrate that the titanium oxide ( <nUm> nm ) / deionized water - based nanofluid exhibits similar characteristics in droplet formation at different temperatures and any small change in the flow rate of this nanofluid has little impact on the size of the droplets formed in a flow focusing geometry . 
the Navier-Stokes- fourier equations , with boundary conditions that account for the effects of velocity - slip and temperature - jump , are compared to the direct simulation monte carlo method for the case of a lid - driven micro-cavity . results are presented for knudsen numbers within the slipflow regime where the onset of nonequilibrium effects are usually observed . good agreement is found in predicting the general features of the velocity field and the recirculating flow . however , although the steady - state pressure distributions along the walls of the driven cavity are generally in good agreement with the monte carlo data , there is some indication that the results are starting to show noticeable differences , particularly at the separation and reattachment points . the modified Navier-Stokes-Fourier equations consistently overpredict the maximum and minimum pressure values throughout the slip regime . this highlights the need for alternative boundary formulations or modeling techniques that can provide accurate and computationally economic solutions over a wider range of knudsen numbers . 
it is well known that rodlike / wormlike micelles can self - organize under flow to form viscoelastic gel phases . flow - induced structure ( FIS ) formation is typically accompanied by an enhancement in the shear viscosity . while configurational dynamics of and collisions between micelles in flow and electrostatic inter-micelle interactions are recognized as the key factors that influence such phase transitions , there are no universally applicable criteria for the onset strain rate as function of salt / surfactant concentration . further , FIS formation is generally considered reversible , i.e. , the structure disintegrates quickly upon flow cessation . In this work , first , we examine the effect of salt concentration on the critical strain rate for CTAB / NaSal solutions of rodlike micelles and show that a " self - similar " phase transition regime , characterized by a constant critical strain , exists . second , we show that under strong ( elongational ) flow conditions , the phase transition is irreversible , leading to the formation of permanent nanogels that are stable long after the flow is stopped . atomic force microscopy shows that the gel phase obtained under strong flow conditions consists of highly aligned micelles . 
the flow focusing geometry is one of several used in microfluidic devices to form monodisperse emulsion droplets . the addition of surfactant leads to the observation of a thread formation regime which has features similar to tip - streaming seen in deformed droplets . this thread formation regime has the potential to decouple the droplet size from the device lengthscales and provides a mechanism to form sub-micron droplets . here , we present results demonstrating the impact of viscosity ratio on the phenomenon . 
we report preliminary data from molecular and rheometric characterization to flow characterization of model fluids in benchmark flow problems , in a range of wi number and Re number flow regimes . the experimental data will be used to critically compare numerical predictions of some well - established constitutive models . we hope to provide physical insight to polymer dynamics in highly non-linear flows , hence to improve constitutive models for a better prediction of dynamics of semi-dilute polymer solutions . 
improved size monodispersity of populations of polymer nanospheres is of enormous interest in the fields of nanotechnology and nanomedicine . As such , the knowledge of exact experimental conditions for precise production of nanospheres is needed for nonaqueous systems . this work presents the use of controlled microfluidic transport methods to study the experimental parameters for fabricating nanoparticles utilizing phase inversion . we report two microfluidic methods for forming polymer nanospheres in small batches to determine the formation conditions . these conditions were then implemented to perform higher throughput formation of polymer nanospheres of the desired size . the controlled microfluidic environment in the laminar flow regime produces improved size monodispersity , decreased average diameter , and affords a greater degree of control over the nanosphere size distribution without adding surfactants or additional solvents . experiments show a nonlinear trend toward decreasing size with decreasing polymer concentration and a linear trend toward decreasing size with increasing flow rate indicating time - course - dependent nucleation and growth mechanism of formation for the resultant nanosphere population within the range of conditions tested . 
an experimental study of droplet breakup in t-shaped microfluidic junctions is presented in which the capillary number and flow rate ratio are varied over a wide range for several different viscosity ratios and several different ratios of the inlet channel widths . the range of conditions corresponds to the region in which both the squeezing pressure that arises when the emerging interface obstructs the channel and the viscous shear stress on the emerging interface strongly influence the process . In this regime , the droplet volume depends on the capillary number , the flow rate ratio , and the ratio of inlet channel widths , which controls the degree of confinement of the droplets . the viscosity ratio influences the droplet volume only when the viscosities are similar . when there is a large viscosity contrast in which the dispersed - phase liquid is at least <nUm> times smaller than the continuous - phase liquid , the resulting size is independent of the viscosity ratio and no transition to a purely squeezing regime appears . In this case , both the droplet volume and the droplet production frequency obey power - law behavior with the capillary number , consistent with expectations based on mass conservation of the dispersed - phase liquid . finally , scaling arguments are presented that result in predicted droplet volumes that depend on the capillary number , flow rate ratio , and width ratio in a qualitatively similar way to that observed in experiments . 
we report the results of a comparative study of microfluidic emulsification of liquids with different viscosities . depending on the properties of the fluids and their rates of flow , emulsification occurred in the dripping and jetting regimes . we studied the characteristic features and typical dependence of the size and of the size distribution of droplets in each regime . for each liquid , we identified a range of hydrodynamic conditions promoting generation of highly monodisperse droplets . viscosity played an important role in emulsification : highly viscous liquids were emulsified into larger droplets with lower polydispersity . although it was not possible to provide a unified scaling for the volumes of the droplets , our results suggest that the break-up dynamics of the lower viscosity fluids resembles the rate - of - flow - controlled break-up , as reported earlier for the formation of bubbles in flow - focusing geometries [ garstecki P , stone HA , whitesides GM ( 2005 ) phys rev lett <nUm> : <nUm> ] . the results of this study can be helpful for a rationalized selection of liquids for the controlled formation of droplets with a predetermined size and with a narrow distribution of sizes . 
industries that pump sludges experience pressure to operate at higher concentrations with sludges that have high mechanical strength properties . the viscous character of the sludge becomes increasingly non-Newtonian and yield stress in nature . the two principal problems are regime determination and laminar flow settling , which ultimately results in pipe blockage . In facing the diversities that sludge management currently presents , it is important to resolve these issues and develop solutions for engineering practice . the approaches developed at the flow process research centre to deal with these problems are introduced . the objectives of this paper are to introduce experimental data of the phenomena associated with the pipe flow of highly concentrated sludge , and use these to develop and evaluate predictive modeling approaches suitable for engineering design purposes . for the prediction of transitional flow , a new general approach for visco - plastic fluids in industrially relevant pipe sizes is presented , based on dimensional analysis of the flow problem . settled bed behavior is modeled using an adapted two - layer model approach , in all flow regimes . the modeling approaches are evaluated using the experimental results obtained . the analysis shows that the present work provides a workable solution for the prediction of the pipe flow of highly concentrated sludges , for engineering design purposes . 
leakage losses and ever - increasing power dissipation in the microprocessor are causing significant thermal , mechanical , and reliability problems . conventional cooling methods are reaching their practical limits , and new methods of lowering the operating temperature of microprocessors are being explored . microfluidics - based cooling schemes are one approach being considered . the implementation of microchannels for forced convection at the chip level shows much promise , as the effective heat transfer surface area and attainable heat flux are very favorable . A major design limitation to such an implementation is the pressure developed within such micro-flows and the stresses that could result . In this study , multiple discrete microchannel heat sink configurations are analyzed computationally and compared in a cooling capability sense , while total pressure drop across the flows is carefully considered . A single cooling channel over an energy source is split into two smaller channels , and so on , while total pressure drop is maintained constant , and specified such that all flows remain in the laminar regime . it is shown that for the configurations analyzed , there exists multiple - dependence optimum cooling configurations . In addition , it is shown that a slimmer design may be implemented with a relatively small effect on cooling capability . furthermore , cooling capability dependence on total pressure drop of the flows is shown to be minimal for high - performing microchannel configurations . 
this study is devoted to the design of an experimental device to generate shock waves in a micropipe . indeed , the recent advances in the microfluidics of gas lead the scientific community to the question of scaling law in supersonic regime . thus , in this paper , we simulate the flow induced by the opening of a small solenoid valve to know if it is able to generate a minishock wave . this shock wave moving in an intermediate pipe could be transmitted into a micro one . In this work , we focus on the flow in the intermediate pipe and on the properties of the transmitted wave into the microchannel . three geometry of convergent between intermediate and micropipe are investigated . we have compared the results of our simulation to the classical analytical models dealing with shock tubes . after presenting the geometries of the study case , we give the characteristics of our numerical approach , and then we describe our main results . In a last section , the flow generated by the valve used in free jet regime is described . 
A novel method is presented for controllably merging aqueous microdroplets within segmented flow microfluidic devices . our approach involves exploiting the difference in hydrodynamic resistance of the continuous phase and the surface tension of the discrete phase through the use of passive structures contained within a microfluidic channel . rows of pillars separated by distances smaller than the representative droplet dimension are installed within the fluidic network and define passive merging elements or chambers . initial experiments demonstrate that such a merging element can controllably adjust the distance between adjacent droplets . In a typical scenario , a droplet will enter the chamber , slow down and stop . it will wait and then merge with the succeeding droplets until the surface tension is overwhelmed by the hydraulic pressure . we show that such a merging process is independent of the inter-droplet separation but rather dependent on the droplet size . moreover , the number of droplets that can be merged at any time is also dependent on the mass flow rate and volume ratio between the droplets and the merging chamber . finally , we note that the merging of droplet interfaces occurs within both compressing and the decompressing regimes . 
we have developed a teaching module to engage undergraduate engineering students in an introductory research project . pairs of students proposed and carried out self - designed projects to study diffusion in microfluidic channels . these channels create laminar flow regimes where dissimilar fluids flow side - by - side and mix through diffusion . custom - built hardware and software allowed students to make quantitative measurements of diffusion . draft reports structured as scientific papers were reviewed by technical staff , writing staff , and peers . students used these reviews to revise their reports and make additional measurements as needed . grades were based on the quality of the final report , with emphasis on students ' documentation of the research process . student feedback verified that the lab project improved understanding of course material , demonstrated the importance of technical writing in the scientific process , and emphasized the value of teamwork . the lab has been adopted in multiple courses at both MIT and yale to teach molecular transport , microfabrication , and other topics . all information needed to recreate the lab is freely available online . 
the results of an experimental investigation of the energy separation performance of a microscale ranque - hilsch vortex tube are presented . the supply channel reynolds number of a microscale ranque - hilsch vortex tube is varied over a considerable range , which extends into the laminar flow regime in order to determine the minimum conditions for cooling . experiments are conducted for a fixed geometry and control valve setting . At low reynolds numbers based on the inlet tube hydraulic diameter and average velocity , the results exhibit an increase in dimensionless temperature in both the hot and cold outlets as the reynolds number is increased from zero , reaching maximum values below <nUm> and <nUm> , respectively . the hot outlet dimensionless temperature decreases after reaching its maximum and achieves a minimum value at a reynolds number below <nUm> . it then increases steadily with further increases in reynolds number . the cold outlet dimensionless temperature decreases steadily after the maximum to become negative at a reynolds number of approximately <nUm> . this implies that the cooling effect occurs at reynolds numbers consistent with turbulent flow . the performance characteristics of the microscale vortex tube operating at higher inlet pressures of <nUm> kPa , <nUm> kPa , and <nUm> kPa with an average inlet temperature of <nUm> K are also presented for cold air mass ratio values over the range of <nUm> - <nUm> . an increase in the inlet pressure causes the values of the dimensionless cold temperature difference to increase over the whole range of the cold air mass fraction . an unstable operation is observed at a length to diameter ratio of approximately <nUm> , causing radial mixing between the cold and hot flow streams and a dramatic change in the cold mass flow fraction plot . 
A dilute suspension is studied in a confined geometry with a 3D numerical simulation . the suspended element is a non-Brownian elastic dumbbell . the suspension is confined between two walls in a shear flow . the dynamics of the dumbbell as well as the associated rheology are presented . despite its simplicity , the system exhibits generic microscopic behaviours of real deformable objects such as vesicles , biological cells or capsules like tumbling or vacillating - breathing . it also reproduces macroscopic behaviours like a shear thinning viscosity characteristic of complex fluids rheology . In addition , the model predicts a confinement law where the intrinsic viscosity varies as ∼ c1 / <nUm> for sufficiently strong confinements ( c is the ratio of dumbbell size over the wall - to - wall distance ) . A transition from a tumbling regime towards a vacillating - breathing one is found . this mode is promoted further by confinement . 
In this work , we have systematically analyzed the scaling law of droplet formation by cross-flow shear method in t-junction microfluidic devices . the droplet formation mechanisms can be distinguished by the capillary number for the continuous phase ( cac ) , which are the squeezing regime ( cac < <nUm> ) , dripping regime ( <nUm> < cac < <nUm> ) , and the transient regime ( <nUm> < cac < <nUm> ) . three corresponding correlations have been suggested in the different range of cac . In the dripping regime , we developed a modified capillary number for the continuous phase ( cac' ) by considering the influence of growing droplet size on the continuous phase flow rate . and the modified model could predict droplet diameter more accurately . In the squeezing regime , the final plug length was contributed by the growth and ' squeeze ' stages based on the observation of dynamic break-up process . In the transient regime , we firstly suggested a mathematical model by considering the influences of the above two mechanisms . the correlations should be very useful for the application of controlling droplet size in t-junction microfluidic devices . 
we integrated electrowetting into a microfluidic flow focusing device to study drop generation under the influence of electric fields . using both the dispersed phase inlet pressure and the applied voltage as control parameters , we find that the range of drop sizes and the drop generation rate can be controlled in a much finer way than with hydrodynamics alone . In particular a " conical spray " regime occurring at a voltage of O(50 V ) allows for continuous tuning of the ( highly monodisperse ) drop diameter from ≈ <nUm> to <nUm> mm at a fixed continuous flow rate . 
two different applications of conformal mapping approaches are proposed for the treatment of double band assemblies operating in a microfluidic channel : ( i ) a quasi-conformal map for the numerical simulation of diffusion - convection processes occurring when the channel is submitted to a microfluidic flow , and ( ii ) a conformal map specifically designed for obtaining the steady - state analytical solution for the pure diffusional regime ( i.e. , without flow ) within the same channel . the latter applies also when such assemblies perform within a thin film of electrolyte . the results are presented for a generator - collector operation of the assemblies but the methods apply also to other situations ( e.g. , generator - generator mode ) . 
despite the prevalence of microfluidic - based heterogeneous immunoassays ( where analytes in solution are captured on a solid surface functionalized with a capture molecule ) , there is incomplete understanding of how assay parameters influence the amount of captured analytes . this study presents computational results and corresponding experimental binding assays in which the capture of analytes is studied under variations in both mass transfer and surface binding , constrained by real - world assay conditions of finite sample volume , assay time , and capture area . our results identify : <nUm> ) a " reagent - limited " regime which exists only under the constraints of finite sample volume and assay time ; <nUm> ) a critical flow rate ( e.g. <nUm> mL min-1 under our assay conditions ) to gain the maximum signal with the fastest assay time ; <nUm> ) an increase in signal by using a short concentrated plug ( e.g. <nUm> mL , <nUm> nM ) rather than a long dilute plug ( e.g. <nUm> mL , <nUm> nM ) of sample ; <nUm> ) the possibility of spending a considerable fraction of the assay time out of the reaction - limited regime . overall , an improved understanding of fundamental physical processes may be particularly beneficial for the design of point - of - care assays , where volumes of reagents and available samples are limited , and the desired time - to - result short . 
we show how fluid can be moved by a laser scanning microscope . selected parts of a fluid film are pumped along the path of a moving warm spot which is generated by the repetitive motion of an infrared laser focus . with this technique , we remotely drive arbitrary two - dimensional fluid flow patterns with a resolution of <nUm> mm . pump speeds of <nUm> mms are reached in water with a maximal temperature increase in the local spot of <nUm> K . various experiments confirm that the fluid motion results from the dynamic thermal expansion in a gradient of viscosity . the viscosity in the spot is reduced by its enhanced temperature . this leads to a broken symmetry between thermal expansion and thermal contraction in the front and the wake of the spot . As result the fluid moves opposite to the spot direction due to both the asymmetric thermal expansion in the spot front and the asymmetric thermal contraction in its wake . we derive an analytical expression for the fluid speed from the navier - stokes equations . its predictions are experimentally confirmed without fitting parameters under a number of different conditions . In water , this nonlinearity leads to a fluid step of < <nUm> nm for each passage of the spot . since the spot movement can be repeated in the kilohertz regime , fluid speeds can exceed <nUm> mms . using this technique , we pump nanoparticles over millimeters through a gel . an all - optical creation of a dilution series of DNA and biomolecules by aliquotation and mixing is demonstrated for fluids sandwiched between untreated and unstructured , disposable microscope cover slips . the shown optical remote control of fluid flow expands the microfluidic paradigm into previously inaccessible regimes of tiny volumes , closed flow paths , fast switching between flow patterns , and remote fluid control under extreme fluid conditions . 
biofilm contains heterogeneous three - dimensional structures composed of extracellular polymeric substance ( EPS ) , which are greatly influenced by flow conditions . here , we report a microfluidic platform highly suitable for nanoscale investigation of biofilms formed under laminar flows . this is possible because biofilms formed on glass beads having an average diameter of about <nUm> mm in the microfluidic device can be easily taken out and located for imaging under high resolution microscopes , such as atomic force microscope ( AFM ) and scanning electron microscope ( SEM ) . escherichia coli formed biofilms in the device at various flow conditions ( 0-50 mL min-1 ) for several days . SEM showed nanopores ( 14-100 nm ) in biofilm at lower flow rates ( <nUm> and <nUm> mL min-1 ) only at within <nUm> days , while such small pores were not observed at higher flow rates ( <nUm> mL min-1 ) during the entire culture period ( 0-5 days ) . AFM results showed that the surface coverage and roughness of biofilm increased as the flow rate increased . these results suggest that like turbulent flow regime flow rates under laminar flow regime greatly influence on the morphology of biofilms in both micro- and nanoscales . 
chip - based flow - through PCR implements the PCR as a continuous process for nucleic acid analytics . the sample is transported in a winding channel through temperature zones required for denaturation , annealing and extension . main fields of application are the monitoring of continuous processes for rapid identification of contaminants and quality control as well as high throughput screening of cells or microorganisms . A modular arrangement with five heating zones for flow - through PCR is discussed and evaluated . the special heater arrangement allows the implementation of up to <nUm> cycles on the footprint of a microscope slide , which is placed on top of a <nUm> zones heating plate . liquid / liquid two phase flow of PCR reaction mixture and mineral oil have been applied to create a segmented flow process scheme . In that way , the developed system may provide flow - through PCR as a unit operation for the droplet based microfluidics platform . the single use of disposable devices is commonly preferred due to the sensitivity of the PCR process to contaminations . all - glass microfluidic chips and disposable chip devices , made from polycarbonate as a replication with identically geometry , have been fabricated and tested . for the first time , microchannel geometries with nearly circular profile developed by all - glass technology have been transferred to mass fabrication by injection compression molding . both devices have been successfully applied for the detection of the tumor suppressor gene p53 . although product yield and selectivity of the amplification process do not depend on the chip material , a well defined , reliable segmented flow regime could only be realized in the all - glass chip . 
the development of any particular analytical or preparative applications using electrochemical techniques in microfluidic devices requires integration of microelectrodes . this involves detailed predictions for optimizing the design of devices and selecting the best hydrodynamic conditions . for this purpose , we undertook a series of works aimed at a precise investigation of mass transport near electrodes with focus on analytical measurements . part I of this series ( anal. chem. <nUm> , <nUm> , 8502-8510 ) evaluated the common case of a single microband electrode embedded within a microchannel under laminar flow . the present work ( part <nUm> ) investigated the case of a pair of microband electrodes operating either in generator - generator or generator - collector modes . the influence of the confining effect and flow velocity on the amperometric responses was examined on the basis of numerical simulations under steady - state regime . several situations were identified , each of them corresponding to specific interactions taking place between the electrodes . related conditions were extracted to establish a zone diagram describing all the situations . these predictions were systematically validated by experimental measurements . the results show that amperometric detections within microchannels can be performed at dual electrodes with higher analytical performances than at single ones . 
multiscale flow phenomena in microfluidic and biomedical applications require the use of heterogeneous modeling approaches . In this paper we present a hybrid method based on coupling the molecular dynamics ( MD ) method , the dissipative particle dynamics ( DPD ) method , and the incompressible navier - stokes ( NS ) equations . MD , DPD , and NS are formulated in separate subdomains and are coupled via an overlapping region by communicating state information at the subdomain boundaries . imposition of boundary conditions in the MD and DPD systems involves particle insertion and deletion , specular wall reflection and body force terms . the latter includes a boundary pressure force in order to minimize near - boundary density fluctuations , and an adaptive shear force which enforces the tangential velocity component of boundary conditions . the triple - decker algorithm is verified for prototype flows , including simple and multi-layer fluids ( couette , poiseuille , and lid - driven cavity ) , using highly accurate reference solutions . A zero - thickness interface is also possible if it is aligned with the flow streamlines . 
capillary forces on the microscale are exploited to create a continuous flow liquid - liquid phase separator . segmented flow regimes of immiscible fluids are generated and subsequently separated into their component phases through an array of high aspect ratio , laser machined , separation ducts ( <nUm> mm wide , <nUm> mm deep ) in a planar , integrated , polytetrafluoroethylene ( PTFE ) microdevice . A controlled pressure differential across the phase separator architecture facilitates the selective passage of the wetting , organic , phase through the separator ducts , enabling separation of microfluidic multiphase flow streams . the reported device is demonstrated to separate water and chloroform segmented flow regimes at flow rates up to <nUm> ml min-1 . separation efficiency is quantified over a range of flow rates and applied pressure differentials , characterising device behaviour and limits of operation . experimental measurements and observations are supported by theoretical hydrodynamic and capillary pressure modelling . the influence of material properties and geometric design parameters on phase separation is quantified and optimisation strategies proposed . the novel ability of the membrane free device to separate an organic phase containing suspended microparticulates , from an aqueous phase , is also demonstrated . 
when immiscible fluids flow in microchannels , monodisperse droplets or jet are obtained depending upon the flow rate of the aqueous phase and the oil phase . In this work , we present experimental data showing that the confinement and the shape of the geometry play a fundamental role . we analyze the stability of the jet in the framework of the lubrication at low reynolds number . In cylindrical geometry , we relate the transition between the droplets regime and the jet regime to the absolute / convective transition of the rayleigh plateau instability and reach a remarkable agreement with the data . In rectangular geometry , we follow the same analysis and point out the existence of an absolutely stable bidimensional jet . 
A non-isothermal rarefied gas flow trough a long tube with an elliptical cross section due to pressure and temperature gradients is studied on the basis of the S - model kinetic equation in the whole range of the knudsen number covering both free molecular regime and hydrodynamic one . A wide range of the pipe section aspect ratio is considered . the mass flow rate is calculated as a function of the pressures and temperatures on the tube ends . the thermomolecular pressure effect has been modeled and the coefficient of the thermomolecular pressure difference has been calculated in whole range of the knudsen number and in wide range of the pipe section aspect ratio . 
this paper is a critical review of how the fluid properties ( e.g. , density , viscosity , conductivity , and permittivity ) and behaviors ( e.g. , electrophoretic motion , electrokinetic aggregation , chaining , and instabilities ) depend on colloid volume fraction . the review focuses on electrokinetic flows in aqueous solutions with suspensions on the order of a few percent that are not considered concentrated , yet may exhibit several behaviors distinct from dilute systems such as non-linear dependence on the particle volume fraction and unexpected behavior such as chaining , aggregation , and instabilities . this non-dilute regime is applicable to a variety of emerging applications such as field induced pattern formations in colloidal dispersions , electrophoretic deposition of colloidal films , nanofluid based thermal management , micron resolution particle image velocimetry , and field induced separations in lab - on - a - chip devices . these applications are often treated as dilute when in fact they may contain considerable volume fractions of particles with significant variations in the particle mobility , fluid electrical conductivity and permittivity , as well as the fluid behavior . original results on electric field induced particle chaining and aggregation as well as fluid instabilities that may develop due to variations in conductivity and permittivity fields are briefly presented . 
microfluidic devices enable rapid fluid transport , well - controlled flow manipulation for small sample volumes , and facilitate high shear and extension rates regimes with ease . these features are critical to the study of fast self - assembly process and interfacial dynamics of complex fluids , and have opened up many exciting possibilities in areas such as biology , physics , chemistry and their technological applications . As the dimensions of the microdevices decrease , the interaction between the intrinsic length - scales of the fluid and the microdevice emerges . In this article , we provide a review on confinement and flow induced rheological and microstructure changes for complex fluids flowing inside microfluidic devices . 
this paper presents a novel approach of mixing two laminar flowing streams in microchannels . the mixer consists of a pair of electrodes disposed along a fluidic channel . by energizing the electrodes with a DC - biased ( <nUm> V ) AC voltage ( <nUm> vpp ) , an electrokinetic flow is induced with a flow profile perpendicular to that of the incoming laminar streams of liquids to be mixed . As a result , the flow lines of the incoming streams and the induced flow are forced to crossover and very efficient stirring and mixing at short mixing length can be achieved . the mixer can be operated from the AC - electroosmotic ( ACEO ) ( σ = <nUm> mS / m , f = <nUm> kHz ) to the AC - electrothermal ( ACET ) ( σ = <nUm> mS / m , f = <nUm> kHz ) flow regimes . the mixing efficiency in the ACEO regime was <nUm> % , with a mixing length of <nUm> m ( q = <nUm> L / min ) , an estimated mixing time of <nUm> ms and an induced ACEO flow velocity of ∼ <nUm> m / s . the mixing efficiency in the ACET regime was <nUm> % for a mixing length of ∼ <nUm> m . the mixer is efficient and suitable for mixing reagents in a fluid media from low to high conductivity as required in diverse microfluidic applications . 
soft lithography of polydimethylsiloxane ( PDMS ) , an elastomeric polymer , has enabled rapid and inexpensive fabrication of microfluidic devices for various biotechnology applications . however , concerns remain about adsorption of compounds on PDMS surfaces because of its porosity and hydrophobicity . here , the adsorption of <nUm> small fluorescent dyes of different hydrophobicity ( calcein and 5- ( and 6-)carboxytetramethylrhodamine ( TMR ) ) on PDMS surface has been systematically characterized , and PDMS adsorption has been compared with <nUm> traditional substrates : glass and polystyrene . to characterize adsorption in a regimen that is more relevant to microfluidic applications , the adsorption and desorption of the <nUm> compounds in PDMS microfluidic channels under flow conditions were also studied . results showed that there was minimal adsorption of the hydrophilic compound calcein on PDMS , whereas the more hydrophobic TMR adsorbed on PDMS up to <nUm> times of that on glass or polystyrene . under flow conditions , the desorption profiles and times needed to drop desorbed compound concentrations to negligible levels ( desorption time constant , 10-42 s ) were characterized . In the worst case scenario , after a 4-min exposure to TMR , <nUm> min of continuous wash resulted in compound concentrations in the microchannels to drop to values below <nUm> - <nUm> ĝ € " <nUm> of the initial concentration . 
we integrate a sensitive microfluidic comparator into a t-junction device and report measurements of the excess pressure drop due to a single moving droplet confined in a rectangular microchannel . we specifically focus on drops that are not coated with surfactants and study the effects of drop size , droplet viscosity and capillary number on their hydrodynamic resistance . In the capillary number range of ≈ 10-3-10-2 , we find two distinct regimes for hydrodynamic resistance behavior based on drop size . In regime I associated with small drops ( drop length / channel width ∼ < <nUm> ) , we find that the pressure drop is independent of the drop size and the capillary number , and depends weakly on the ratio of the viscosities of the two immiscible phases . In regime II , associated with large drops ( drop length / channel width > ∼ <nUm> ) , depending on the viscosity ratio of the two phases , the hydrodynamic resistance could increase , decrease or remain unchanged with drop size . we present a simple model that qualitatively captures these experimental trends . this model reveals that the pressure drop in regime I is dominated by the dissipation due to the end caps , and in regime II by both the end caps and the central body of the droplet . such fundamental understanding will enable the design of large - scale energy - efficient fluidic circuits by minimizing the overall pressure drop in a network and may also provide insights into controlling droplet traffic to build functional passively - driven two - phase microfluidic technologies . 
magnetohydrodynamic mixing of two fluids in an annular microchannel is modelled as a two - dimensional , laminar , convection - diffusion problem , and examined using asymptotic analysis and numerical simulation . the time T required for mixing of a plug of solute depends on the peclet number pe , and on the geometry of the annulus . three scaling regimes are identified : purely diffusive , taylor - dispersive , and convection - dominated ; each with a characteristic power - law dependence of T upon pe . consequences of these results for optimal micromixer design are discussed . 
the use of phospholipid - coated microbubbles for medical applications is gaining considerable attention . however , the preparation of lipid - coated microbubble suspensions containing the ideal size and size distribution of bubbles still represents a considerable challenge . the most commonly used preparation methods of sonication and mechanical agitation result in the generation of polydisperse microbubbles with diameters ranging from less than <nUm> mm to greater than <nUm> mm . efforts have been made via distinctly different techniques such as microfluidic and electrohydrodynamic bubbling to prepare lipid - coated microbubbles with diameters less than <nUm> mm and with a narrow size distribution , and recent results have been highly promising . In this paper , we describe a detailed investigation of the latter method that essentially combines liquid and air flow , and an applied electric field to generate microbubbles . A parametric plot was constructed between the air flow rate ( qg ) and the lipid suspension flow rate ( ql ) to identify suitable flow rate regimes for the preparation of phospholipid - coated microbubbles with a mean diameter of <nUm> mm and a standard deviation of <nUm> mm . the parametric plot has also helped in developing a scaling equation between the bubble diameter and the ratio qg / ql . At ambient temperature ( <nUm> ° C ) , these bubbles were very stable with their size remaining almost unchanged for <nUm> min . the influence of higher temperatures such as the human body temperature ( <nUm> ° C ) on the size and stability of the microbubbles was also explored . it was found that the mean bubble diameter fell rapidly to begin with but then stabilized at 1-2 mm after <nUm> min . 
the advent of nanotechnology has facilitated the preparation of colloidal particles with adjustable sizes and the control of their size - dependent properties . physical manipulation , such as separation , mixing , and concentration , of these colloidal particles represents an essential step for fully utilizing their potential in a wide spectrum of nanotechnology applications . In this study , we investigate hybrid electrokinetics , the combination of dielectrophoresis and electrohydrodynamics , for active manipulation of colloidal particles ranging from nanometers to micrometers in size . A concentric electrode configuration , which is optimized for generating electrohydrodynamic flow , has been designed to elucidate the effectiveness of hybrid electrokinetics and define the operating regimes for different microfluidic operations . the results indicate that the relative importance of electrohydrodynamics increases with decreasing particle size as predicted by a scaling analysis and that electrohydrodynamics is pivotal for manipulating nanoscale particles . using the concentric electrodes , we demonstrate separation , mixing , and concentration of colloidal particles by adjusting the relative strengths of different electrokinetic phenomena . the effectiveness of hybrid electrokinetics indicates its potential to serve as a generic technique for active manipulation of colloidal particles in various nanotechnology applications . 
we develop two models to describe ion transport in variable - height micro- and nanochannels . for the first model , we obtain a one - dimensional ( unsteady ) partial differential equation governing flow and charge transport through a shallow and wide electrokinetic channel . In this model , the effects of electric double layer ( EDL ) on axial transport are taken into account using exact solutions of the poisson - boltzmann equation . the second simpler model , which is approachable analytically , assumes that the EDLs are confined to near - wall regions . using a characteristics analysis , we show that the latter model captures concentration polarization ( CP ) effects and provides useful insight into its dynamics . two distinct CP regimes are identified : CP with propagation in which enrichment and depletion shocks propagate outward , and CP without propagation where polarization effects stay local to micro- nanochannel interfaces . the existence of each regime is found to depend on a nanochannel dukhin number and mobility of the co-ion nondimensionalized by electroosmotic mobility . interestingly , microchannel dimensions and axial diffusion are found to play an insignificant role in determining whether CP propagates . the steady state condition of propagating CP is shown to be controlled by channel heights , surface chemistry , and co-ion mobility instead of the reservoir condition . both models are validated against experimental results in part II of this two - paper series . 
In the present work , we analyze the capillary filling dynamics in centrifugally actuated microfluidic platforms with dynamically evolving contact line motion for wetting fluids . special attention is devoted to estimate the effects of variable hydraulic resistances over different flow regimes . dynamics of the meniscus advancement within the rotating microchannel turns out to be typically nonlinear , in tune with the relative instantaneous strengths of the capillary forces , centrifugal forces , and viscous resistances . detailed dynamical characteristics of the meniscus evolution are obtained from the approximate semianalytical and full - scale numerical solutions , and are found to agree well with the experimental findings on lab - on - a - compact disk arrangements . 
flow regimes obtained as a consequence of two immiscible fluids interacting at a t-junction are presented for high capillary numbers and different flow rates of the continuous and dispersed phases . through lattice boltzmann based simulations , a regime map is created that distinguishes parallel flows from droplet flows . simulations show the dependence of flow rates and viscosity ratio on the volume of droplets formed , which is compared with existing experimental data . At high capillary numbers , the transition zone which separates parallel and droplet flows shrinks , and is influenced by the viscosity ratio as well . 
In the laminar flow regime which characterizes the operation of most microfluidic systems , mixing is governed primarily by molecular diffusion . an increase in the interfacial surface between the fluids contained in the system facilitates the mixing process . this can be obtained by active external perturbation , requiring complex systems and complex operation , or passively by clever design over the geometrical constraints . here , we describe an active micromixer technique based on the excitation of vortices in proximity to sharp corners of junctions , as a result of simple low frequency vibration of the device . results showing the working principle in both static and fluid through conditions are presented . 
we investigate the effect of confinement on drop formation in microfluidic devices . the presence or absence of drop formation is studied for two immiscible coflowing liquids in a microfluidic channel , where the channel width is considerably larger than the channel height . we show that stability of the inner fluid thread depends on the channel geometry : when the width of the inner fluid is comparable to or larger than the channel height , hydrodynamic instabilities are suppressed , and a stable jet that does not break into drops results ; otherwise , the inner fluid breaks into drops , in either a dripping or jetting regime . we present a model that accounts for the data and experimentally exploit this effect of geometric confinement to induce the breakup of a jet at a spatially defined location . 
though much experimental work has been done on droplet formation in microfluidic t-junctions , the field is fragmented due to differences in channel dimensions , flow rates , and materials used . the same is true for models , which describe a limited range of the droplet formation spectrum , due to obvious boundary conditions . In this paper , we tried to unify the available data into a more general model using statistical analysis . this approach was chosen because of its accessibility and ease of use for unbiased analysis of available data . we found that data from various literature sources , and therefore different regimes , were described with a two - step model , which distinguishes between a droplet growth and a droplet detachment phase . the two - step model was found statistically valid over the whole range of observed droplet shapes ( viz plugs , discs , or drops ) and encompassed all systems and sources . channel dimensions were found to determine droplet growth , while both continuous and disperse phase flow rate govern the subsequent time needed for detachment . by using a statistical approach , we were able to generalise data available on t-junctions into general rules of behaviour . 
A microfluidic flow - converter that transforms an oscillatory flow into a steady - like flow in a reciprocating - type pumping device is successfully developed in this study . the flow quality at the outlet is found to be significantly improved . the present micro-device is composed of two single - chamber PZT micropumps in parallel arrangement and can be fabricated using simple micro-electro-mechanical-system ( MEMS ) techniques . based on the concept of the electronic bridge converter , the flow rectification is supported by four passive planar valves . two operation modes , in-phase and anti-phase , were used to test the performance of the present device . In addition , the flow characteristics at the outlet were examined by an externally triggered micro-PIV system . the results reveal that the current flow - converter provided both high volume and smoothly continuous flow rates at the outlet when it was in anti-phase mode . moreover , the volume flow rate was linearly proportional to the excitation frequency within a specific frequency regime . this indicates that the flow - converter was easily operated and controlled . the present microfluidic flow - converter has great potential for integration into future portable micro- or bio-fluidic systems . 
the formation of O / W macroemulsions stabilized by a non-ionic surfactant ( quillaja saponin ) and gelatinized starch was investigated using a flow focusing device consisting of circular microchannels . droplets of hot oil ( toil = <nUm> K ) were dispersed into an aqueous solution of saponin and potato starch granules . the oil fraction varied between <nUm> % and <nUm> % ( dilute macroemulsions ) while the starch - to - saponin concentration ratio , α , ranged between <nUm> and <nUm> . the heat transfer from the hot oil droplet ( <nUm> to <nUm> mm in diameter ) induced the gelatinization of the adjacent starch granules to create a thin - shell around the oil droplet . In order to optimize the droplet generation , the physical properties of fluids were determined and the interactions between saponin and gelatinized starch granules were studied by measuring the specific conductivity . In particular , the onset , peak and end temperatures of starch gelatinization were determined . for various α , the monodispersed regime was determined by measuring the oil droplet volume vdrop . for all cases studied , vdrop followed a power dependence with the flow rate of the aqueous phase but the exponents were different ( <nUm> < n < <nUm> ) . the formation process , i.e. the dripping and jetting regime , and the generation time of oil droplets were also detailed . 
we present theoretical results on the deterministic and stochastic motion of a dumbbell carried by a uniform flow through a three - dimensional spatially periodic potential . depending on parameters like the flow velocity , there are two different kinds of movement : transport along a potential valley and a stair - like motion oblique to the potential trenches . the crossover between these two regimes , as well as the deflection angle , depend on the size of the dumbbell . moreover , thermal fluctuations cause a resonance - like variation in the deflection angle as a function of the dumbbell extension . 
an associative polymer - surfactant system has been used to observe the effects of chain conformation in the entry flow through a microfabricated planar <nUm> : <nUm> : <nUm> contraction - expansion geometry . the well - studied system of the flexible polymer poly(ethylene oxide ) ( PEO ) and anionic surfactant sodium dodecyl sulfate ( SDS ) was used . dilute polymer solutions with increasing SDS concentration were characterized in steady and dynamic shear , as well as capillary breakup extensional rheology . based on this characterization , the primary quantitative difference is an increase in zero - shear viscosity as a result of the PEO chain expansion brought on by association of SDS surfactant micelles . however , these quantitatively similar solutions were observed to exhibit much more qualitatively different flow patterns via fluorescent streak imaging in the entry flow . In contrast to previous work on PEO solutions , the PEO - SDS systems were observed to transition to a steady viscoelastic flow regime characterized by stable lip vortices at much lower elasticity and weissenberg numbers . the resulting insight gained regarding the utility of microfluidic flows in elucidating effects of subtle conformational changes further illustrates the potential for using microfabricated devices as rheometric tools for measuring the properties of dilute and weakly viscoelastic fluids . 
this paper deals with parametrical studies focused on determination of selected characteristics of AC electroosmotic micropumps in non-linear ( high - amplitude ) regimes in the interdigitated arrangement . the net velocity and current - voltage phase shift are computed . non-equilibrium Navier-Stokes-Poisson-Nernst-Planck model that describes the transport processes in the entire time and spatial domains including electric double layers ( EDLs ) was derived and analyzed . the obtained results were qualitatively interpreted by means of a simple relation derived for RC circuit in series . locations of the high net velocity regions in the parametric space were found . the model thus can contribute to development and optimization of microfluidic devices driven by AC electric fields . flow reversals were observed in frequency and geometric scale characteristics . we suggest that the flow reversals do not necessarily rely on the electric charge injection or the condensed layer formation . the direction of the net flow probably depends only on an interplay of the electric , viscous and pressure forces . 
capillary cone jets are natural microfluidic structures arising in steady capillary tip streaming , whose paradigms are electrospray and flow focusing phenomena . In this work , we make a profound revision of the basic underlying physics of generic cone jets from thousands of experimental measurements , most of them reported in the literature . first , the boundaries of the stability region of steady jetting are calculated . we describe these limitations by instability mechanisms associated with the local flow structure in the tip and the issuing jet and with the global behavior of the meniscus . second , to undertake a general physical treatment of cone jets in steady regime , we analyze the energy balance taking place in the tips of both flow focusing and electrospray . this analysis yields a fundamental result : if the electrospray data are expressed in terms of an effective pressure drop , both phenomena satisfy the same scaling law for the droplet size , which exhibits nearly complete similarity in the parameter window where quasimonodisperse sprays are produced . that effective pressure drop is a function of the liquid properties exclusively , i.e. , it does not depend on the operational parameters ( flow rate and applied voltage ) . moreover , the stability limits of the operational regimes are analyzed in detail , finding fundamental coincidences between flow focusing and electrospray as well . these results provide most useful general description and predictive scaling laws for nearly monodisperse microspraying or nanospraying based on steady cone jets , of immediate applicability in analytical chemistry , chemical engineering , biochemistry , pharmaceutical and food technologies , painting , and many other technological fields . 
we present mesoscopic simulations of the counterion - induced electro-osmotic flow in different electrostatic coupling regimes . two simulation methods are compared , dissipative particle dynamics ( DPD ) and coupled lattice - boltzmann / molecular dynamics ( LB / MD ) . A general mapping scheme to match DPD to LB / MD is developed . for the weak coupling regime , analytic expressions for the flow profiles in the presence of partial - slip as well as no - slip boundary conditions are derived from the poisson - boltzmann and stokes equations , which are in good agreement with the numerical results . the influence of electrofriction and partial slip on the flow profiles is discussed . 
the number of cases involving produce - associated illnesses has been increasing recently , especially those related to pathogen - contaminated irrigation water . clearly , real - time and extremely sensitive detection of these pathogens is needed to ensure that produce - related farming procedures are safe . In our study , we demonstrated that the use of a microfluidic system can detect escherichia coli in a water pipe at laminar and turbulent flow regimes . A one - step latex immunoagglutination assay was performed within a microfluidic device that uses fiber optics to detect pathogens . the results were then successfully validated by using cultured E. coli and a salt tracer . the detection of the E. coli was thus accomplished in real time ( < <nUm> min per each assay ) and at concentrations less than <nUm> cfu mL'1 , suggesting that the system is appropriate for monitoring waterborne pathogens . specifically , our study found that , in a straight pipe , cell fragments and free antigens of E. coli behave in ways similar to the salt tracer , while viable E. coli cells do not . the computational fluid dynamics model successfully predicted flow dispersion and presents the possibility of modeling the behavior of waterborne pathogens . this study also suggests the possibility of early detection of systemic contamination and timely public health risk assessment before a costly disease outbreak occurs . 
polymer dynamics play an important role in a diversity of fields including materials science , physics , biology and medicine . the spatiotemporal responses of individual molecules such as biopolymers have been critical to the development of new materials , the expanded understanding of cell structures including cytoskeletal dynamics , and DNA replication . the ability to probe single molecule dynamics however is often limited by the availability of small - scale technologies that can manipulate these systems to uncover highly intricate behaviors . advances in micro- and nano-scale technologies have simultaneously provided us with valuable tools that can interface with these systems including methods such as microfluidics . here , we report on the creation of micro-curvilinear flow through a small - scale fluidic approach , which we have been used to impose a flow - based high radial acceleration ( ∼ <nUm> g ) on individual flexible polymers . we were able to employ this microfluidic - based approach to adjust and control flow velocity and acceleration to observe real - time dynamics of fluorescently labeled l-phage DNA molecules in our device . this allowed us to impose mechanical stimulation including stretching and bending on single molecules in localized regimes through a simple and straightforward technology - based method . we found that the flexible DNA molecules exhibited multimodal responses including distinct conformations and controllable curvatures ; these characteristics were directly related to both the elongation and bending dynamics dictated by their locations within the curvilinear flow . we analyzed the dynamics of these individual molecules to determine their elongation strain rates and curvatures ( ∼ <nUm> m-1 ) at different locations in this system to probe the individual polymer structural response . these results demonstrate our ability to create high radial acceleration flow and observe real - time dynamic responses applied directly to individual DNA molecules . this approach may also be useful for studying other biologically based polymers including additional nucleic acids , actin filaments , and microtubules and provide a platform to understand the material properties of flexible polymers at a small scale . 
In this work the laminar - to - turbulent transition in microchannels of circular cross-section is studied experimentally . In order to single out the effects of relative roughness , compressibility and channel length - to - diameter ratio on the reynolds number at which transition occurs , experimental runs have been carried out on circular microchannels in fused silica - smooth for all purposes - and in stainless steel ( which possess a high surface roughness ) , with a diameter between <nUm> and <nUm> mm and a length of 5-50 cm through which nitrogen flows . for each tube the friction factor has been computed . the values of the critical reynolds number have been determined plotting the poiseuille number ( i.e. , the product of the friction factor , f , times the reynols number , Re ) as a function of the average mach number between inlet and outlet . the transitional regime was found to start no earlier than at values of the reynolds number around 1,800-2,000 . it has been observed that surface roughness has no effect on the hydraulic resistance in the laminar region for a relative roughness lower than <nUm> % , and that friction factor obeys the poiseuille law , if it is correctly computed taking compressibility into account . it is found that recent correlations for the prediction of the critical reynolds number in microchannels that link the relative roughness of the microtubes to the critical reynolds number do not agree with the present results . 
A volume of fluid ( VOF ) method is used to study the immiscible gas - liquid two - phase flow in a microchannel t-junction , through which the accurate interface of the taylor bubble flow inside the micro-channel is captured and compared with visualization experiment of taylor bubbles ' generation inside a t-junction microfluidic chip . the numerical results are in good agreement with the experimental measurements , which confirms the validation of our model . then the length of gas - liquid slugs and velocity distribution inside slugs at various conditions are investigated with the superficial velocity of gas and liquid phase ranging from <nUm> to <nUm> m / s , and capillary number ranging from <nUm> × 10[?]-[?]4 to <nUm> × 10[?]-[?]2 . A comprehensive description of mechanism of bubbles ' break - off is achieved and the transition capillary number from squeezing regime to shearing regime is found around <nUm> × 10[?]-[?]3 . finally the influences of fluid viscosity , surface tension of the gas - liquid interface and the velocity of both gas and liquid phases on the characteristic of the gas - liquid two - phase flow in micro-channel are also discussed in detail . 
using microscopic particle image velocimetry , we examine the flow field around an oil droplet as it is formed by hydrodynamic focusing in an aqueous solution using a pressure - driven cross-channel microfluidic device . by detecting the temporal dependence of the instantaneous flow fields of the continuous phase in the dripping regime , we show that shear is not the primary mechanism that initiates droplet formation in our low flow rate and moderate capillary number experimental conditions . instead , the advancing finger of oil partially and temporarily plugs the outlet channel , creating a pressure difference that builds up and is released when water from the side channels pushes the tip of the finger into the outlet channel , thereby facilitating the birth of the droplet by interfacial pinch - off that is primarily initiated by an extensional flow . 
we perform extensive experiments with coflowing liquids in microfluidic devices and provide a closed expression for the drop size as a function of measurable parameters in the jetting regime that accounts for the experimental observations ; this expression works irrespective of how the jets are produced , providing a powerful design tool for this type of experiments . 
we perform a detailed study of the interdiffusion of two miscible liquids of different viscosities , water and a water / glycerol mixture , flowing side by side within a pressure - driven microfluidic flow . using raman imaging , we measure cartographies of the concentration in glycerol for different imposed flow rates . the analysis of these experimental data confirms a classical diffusive mixing since the extent of the diffusion layer follows a <nUm> / <nUm> power law regime with the streamwise coordinate x . however , the interdiffusion layer is not located in the center of the microchannel , and its mean position ym evolves with x during the mixing . we also derive a theoretical model and present analytical arguments to explain the above results . we demonstrate that the displacement of the interdiffusion zone ym(x) is due to the coupling between hydrodynamics and the mixing through the dependence of the viscosity with the glycerol concentration . eventually , we perform numerical simulations of the theoretical model and compare the solutions with the experimental data in order to estimate quantitatively an interdiffusion coefficient . 
using a phase - field model to describe fluid / fluid interfacial dynamics and a lattice boltzmann model to address hydrodynamics , two dimensional ( 2D ) numerical simulations have been performed to understand the mechanisms of droplet formation in microfluidic t-junction . although 2D simulations may not capture underlying physics quantitatively , our findings will help to clarify controversial experimental observations and identify new physical mechanisms . we have systematically examined the influence of capillary number , flow rate ratio , viscosity ratio , and contact angle in the droplet generation process . we clearly observe that the transition from the squeezing regime to the dripping regime occurs at a critical capillary number of <nUm> , which is independent of flow rate ratio , viscosity ratio , and contact angle . In the squeezing regime , the squeezing pressure plays a dominant role in the droplet breakup process , which arises when the emerging interface obstructs the main channel . the droplet size depends on both the capillary number and the flow rate ratio , but is independent of the viscosity ratio under completely hydrophobic wetting conditions . In the dripping regime , the droplet size will be significantly influenced by the viscosity ratio as well as the built-up squeezing pressure . when the capillary number increases , the droplet size becomes less dependent on the flow rate ratio . the contact angle also affects the droplet shape , size , and detachment point , especially at small capillary numbers . more hydrophobic wetting properties are expected to produce smaller droplets . interestingly , the droplet size is dependent on the viscosity ratio in the squeezing regime for less hydrophobic wetting conditions . 
gas - liquid flow in microchannels is of fundamental importance to many engineering applications involving microreactors , monolith reactors , microheat exchangers , and several other microfluidic devices . slug flow , characterized by motion of long bubbles , also referred to as taylor bubbles , is the most important of the different two - phase flow regimes observed in microchannels . In this work , the formation of bubbles and their rise in circular capillaries in the taylor flow regime is investigated by using the volume - of - fluid method . the dynamics of formation and rise of taylor bubbles in glass capillaries of <nUm> , <nUm> , <nUm> , and <nUm> mm diameter for air - water and air - octane systems was simulated . the effects of superficial gas and liquid velocities , channel geometry ( nozzle wall thickness , nozzle diameter , capillary diameter ) , wall adhesion ( contact angle ) , and fluid properties ( surface tension , viscosity ) on the dynamics of bubble formation were investigated . the predicted bubble shapes and bubble formation periods were validated using the experimental data reported by salman et al. ( salman , W. ; gavriilidis , A. ; angeli , P. chem. eng . sci. <nUm> , <nUm> , 6653-6666 ) for a wide range of experimental parameters . such experimentally validated computational flow models will be useful to simulate the mass transfer and reactions in microcapillaries / channels . 
organic - aqueous liquid ( phenol ) extraction is one of many standard techniques to efficiently purify DNA directly from cells . effective dispersion of one fluid phase in the other increases the surface area over which biological component partitioning may occur , and hence enhances DNA extraction efficiency . electrohydrodynamic ( EHD ) instability can be harnessed to achieve this goal and has been experimentally demonstrated by one of the co-authors ( JDZ ) . In this work , analysis and simulation are combined to study two - phase EHD instability . In the problem configuration , the organic ( phenol ) phase flows into the microchannel in parallel with and sandwiched between two aqueous streams , creating a three - layer planar geometry ; the two liquid phases are immiscible . an electric field is applied to induce instability and to break the organic stream into droplets . the taylor - melcher leaky - dielectric model is employed to investigate this phenomenon . A linear analysis is carried out with a chebyshev pseudospectral method , whereas a fully nonlinear numerical simulation is implemented using a finite volume , immersed boundary method ( IBM ) . the results from both models compare favorably with each other . the linear analysis reveals basic instability characteristics such as kink and sausage modes . on the other hand , the nonlinear simulation predicts surface deformation in the strongly nonlinear regime pertinent to droplet formation . these numerical tools will be used to investigate the effects of the applied electric field , geometry , and convective flow rate on mixing and dispersion . the eventual objective is to maximize surface area of the organic phase under given experimental conditions for optimized DNA extraction . 
improved flow regime stability and lower pressure drop may be possible in two - phase microfluidic heat exchangers through the use of a hydrophobic membrane for phase separation . past research on vapor - venting heat exchangers showed that membrane mechanical and hydrodynamic properties are crucial for heat exchanger design . however , previous characterizations of hydrophobic membranes were primarily carried out at room temperatures with air or nitrogen , as opposed to liquid water and steam at the elevated operating temperature of the heat exchangers . this work investigates laminated PTFE , unlaminated PTFE , and nylon membranes and quantifies the permeability of the membranes to air and steam . the pressure drop across the membrane as a function of fluid flow rate and temperature characterizes the membrane permeability . this work will facilitate more focused experimental work and predictive modeling on optimizing membrane properties and will help with the development of more effective vapor venting heat exchangers . 
we develop two direct methods to simultaneously measure the dynamic capillary pressure and the viscosity of fluids by application of differential forces during flow into micro-channels . In the first method , a series of external pressures is applied in conjunction with the dynamic capillary pressure and a " bagley analysis " is applied to the flow front velocity , and in the second , we utilize differential gravitational forces . by explicitly measuring the dynamic capillary pressure , the measurement window of the recently developed multi-sample micro-slit rheometer is extended to the regime where capillary forces are significant . these measurement methods will be useful in understanding filling flows encountered in diverse areas such as microfluidics , oil recovery and biological transport . 
this article develops the theoretical analysis of transport and dispersion phenomena in wide - bore chromatography at values of the peclet number pe beyond the upper bound of validity of the taylor - aris theory . it is shown that for poiseuille flows in cylindrical capillaries the average residence time grows logarithmically with the peclet number , while the variance of the outlet chromatogram scales as the power <nUm> / <nUm> of pe . In the presence of slip boundary conditions , both the mean and the variance of the outlet chromatograms saturate at high pe , and this phenomenon provides an indirect transport - based way to detect slip flow conditions at the solid walls and , more generally , flow distributions in channel flows . 
since fabrication of microchips by MEMS technology has emerged , microchips that can interact with biological samples like virus , bacteria , DNA has been developed . considering the advantages such as cost , dimension and compatibility with IC fabrication , these chips have found specific application areas . microfluids and microfluidics constitute one of the major research areas of this emerging field , BioMEMS . micro mixers have become an important component of BioMEMS which are designed for microfluidics applications . fluids demonstrate two types of flow regime , laminar and turbulent . turbulent flow is more advantageous than laminar flow when mixing is considered . creating turbulent flow within microchannels , commonly used in BioMEMS devices , is a challenging task as scaling into the micro domain causes fluids to mix solely by diffusion . this study presents a method for mixing in micro environment based on chaotic advection . the proposed micro mixer makes use of the turbulent flow induced by bubbles which are created by thermal actuation based on joule heating principle on gold electrodes . 
In this study , we incorporated mixing units of three - dimensional ( 3D ) interconnected pore network inside microfluidic channels by combining single prism holographic lithography and photolithography . 3D pore network structures were generated by the interference of four laser beams generated by a truncated triangular pyramidal prism . the levelling between the 3D porous structures and the channel walls was greatly improved by employing supercritical drying , which induced negligible internal capillary stresses and reduced substantially anisotropic volume shrinkage of 3D structures . also , complete sealing of the microfluidic chips was achieved by attaching flexible PDMS cover substrates . overall mixing performance of the systems with completely sealed mixing units was <nUm> % greater than that obtained without such mixers . splitting and recombination of flows in the 3D interconnected pore structures enhanced the mixing efficiency by decreasing the diffusion path and increasing the surface contact between two liquid streams . because the flow splitting and recombination was developed through the 3D interconnected pore network , high mixing efficiency ( > <nUm> ) was achieved at low reynolds numbers ( Re < <nUm> ) and peclet numbers in the regime of pe < <nUm> × <nUm> . 
we have successfully fabricated a glass microfluidic device with a confined t-shaped junction in an ordinary laboratory without a clean room . In the microfluidic t-shaped junction , the bubble formation regime and the bubble volume generated were studied under different combinations of gas inlet pressure , liquid flow rate , liquid viscosity , and surface tension . it was found that both the minimum and the maximum gas inlet pressures for generating bubbles were larger than and proportional to the liquid pressure drop from the t-shaped junction to the channel outlet . the capillary number was found to have a significant influence on the bubble volume . an empirical relation is proposed to predict the bubble volume based on the capillary number and the liquid pressure drop from the t-shaped junction to the channel outlet . 
this paper identifies a new mechanism for amplification of stochastic disturbances in channel flows of strongly elastic polymer solutions . for streamwise constant flows with high elasticity numbers μ and non-vanishing reynolds numbers Re , the O(mRe3) scaling of the variance amplification is established using singular perturbations techniques . this demonstrates that large variances can be maintained in stochastically driven flows occurring in weak inertial / strong elastic regimes . mathematically , the amplification arises due to nonnormality of the governing equations and , physically , it is caused by the stretching of the polymer stresses by the background shear . the reported developments provide a possible route for a bypass transition to ' elastic turbulence ' and suggest a novel method for efficient mixing in micro-fabricated straight channels . 
optical chromatography is a powerful technique , capable of separating micron - sized particles within a fluid flow , based on their intrinsic properties , including size , shape and refractive index . briefly , particles in a fluid flow are subject to two forces , the stokes drag force due to the fluid and then an introduced optical force as supplied by a laser beam , acting in opposite but collinear directions . according to the particle 's intrinsic hydrodynamic and optical properties , equilibrium positions may form where the two forces balance , which is highly dependent on the properties of the particle and as a result provides a means for spatial separation in a sample mixture . optical chromatography is a passive sorting technique , where pre-tagging of the particles of interest is not required , allowing for non-discrete distributions to be evaluated and / or separated . firstly we review the current stage of optical chromatography . we present a new advance in optical chromatography potentially enabling the unique beam delivery properties of photonic crystal fiber ( PCF ) to be employed and integrated into microfluidic chips . also , for the first time a finite element method is applied to the optical field in the theoretical analysis of optical chromatography , which is found to be in excellent agreement with the current ray optics model , even for particles much smaller than the optical wavelength . this will pave the way for the technique to be extended into the nanoparticle regime . 
flow focusing devices ( FFDs ) , with dimensions smaller than <nUm> mm have recently been used for cell encapsulation . however , encapsulation of larger clusters of cells , like islets of langerhans , is of considerable interest . producing larger capsules requires larger FFDs . we focus here on the geometrical scaling-up between a small FFD ( <nUm> mm ) and a larger one ( <nUm> mm , <nUm> mm , <nUm> mm ) . we determine the driving pressure conditions to obtain the droplet regime at any size of the FFD . A similar behavior of the device is experimentally obtained by a scaling of the dimensions by a ratio λ and a scaling of the driving pressures by the ratio <nUm> / λ . 
In this contribution the impact of culture medium flow on the cultivation of madin - darby canine kidney cells on quartz crystal resonators ( QCRs ) was studied . cells were cultivated at different medium flow rates in a bioreactor chip containing <nUm> QCRs . confluency and motility of cells were analyzed based on light microscopical pictures and impedance spectra of the resonators . results were compared with cells cultivated in culture flasks mounted on a shaker and CFD simulation results of the bioreactor chip . based on our studies the flow - regime in the micro fluidic channel geometry has major impact e.g. on the cell division rate . 
the rapid development of two - phase microfluidic devices has triggered the demand for a detailed understanding of the flow characteristics inside microchannel heat sinks to advance the cooling process of micro-electronics . the present study focuses on the experimental investigation of pressure drop characteristics and flow visualization of a two - phase flow in a silicon microchannel heat sink . the microchannel heat sink consists of a rectangular silicon chip in which <nUm> rectangular microchannels were chemically etched with a depth of <nUm> mm , width of <nUm> mm , and a length of <nUm> mm . experiments are carried out for mass fluxes ranging from <nUm> to <nUm> kg / m2 s and heat fluxes from <nUm> to <nUm> kW / m2 using FC-72 as the working fluid . bubble growth and flow regimes are observed using high speed visualization . three major flow regimes are identified : bubbly , slug , and annular . the frictional two - phase pressure drop increases with exit quality for a constant mass flux . an assessment of various pressure drop correlations reported in the literature is conducted for validation . A new general correlation is developed to predict the two - phase pressure drop in microchannel heat sinks for five different refrigerants . the experimental pressure drops for laminar - liquid laminar - vapor and laminar - liquid turbulent - vapor flow conditions are predicted by the new correlation with mean absolute errors of <nUm> % and <nUm> % , respectively . 
A sensor system combining a novel pressure stable thermoelectric flow and impedimetric sensor for monitoring chemical conversion in micro fluidic channels was developed . devices were optimized for hydraulic diameters ~ <nUm> mm and overpressure regime . impedimetric sensors consist of a pair of interdigital electrodes deposited on a silicon substrate . thermoelectric flow sensors consist of a perforated membrane with a heater in between two thermocouples . based on our results both sensors can detect in parallel relative changes in thermal and electrical properties of less than <nUm> % . thus the system enables the inline monitoring of chemical conversion by means of <nUm> parameters . 
the separation of red blood cells from plasma flowing in microchannels is possible by biophysical effects such as the zweifach - fung bifurcation law . In the present study , daughter channels are placed alongside a main channel such that cells and plasma are collected separately . the device is aimed to be a versatile but yet very simple module producing high - speed and high - efficiency plasma separation . the resulting lab - on - a - chip is manufactured using biocompatible materials . purity efficiency is measured for mussel and human blood suspensions as different parameters , such as flow rate and geometries of the parent and daughter channels are varied . the issues of blood plasma separation at the microscale are discussed in relation to the different regimes of flow . results are compared with those obtained by other researchers in the field of micro-separation of blood . 
introduction : pulmonary hypoplasia is a condition of the newborn that is characterized by underdeveloped lungs and poor outcome . one strategy in the treatment of patients with hypoplasia is to augment underdeveloped lungs using biocompatible artificial lung tissue . however , one central challenge in current pulmonary tissue engineering efforts remains the development of a stable bio-mimetic alveolar - capillary membrane . accordingly , we have built a series of bio-mimetic microfluidic devices that specifically model the alveolar - capillary membrane . current designs include a single - layer microchip that exposes alveolar and endothelial cell types to controlled fluidic stimuli . A more advanced multi-layered device allows for alveolar cells to be cultured at an air interface while allowing constant media nourishment and waste removal , thus better mimicking the physiologic milieu of the alveolar - capillary interface . both devices possess the benefit of parallel testing . material and methods : microdevices were fabricated using soft lithography in a biocompatible transparent polymeric material , polydimethyl siloxane , sealed covalently to glass . the multistage microdevice also integrated a suspended polyethylene terephthalate membrane connected via microfluidic channels to constant media and air access . pulmonary endothelial ( HMEC-1 ) and alveolar epithelial ( A549 ) cell lines , along with fetal pulmonary cells ( FPC ) harvested from swiss webster mice at day <nUm> gestational age , were studied under multiple hydrodynamic shear conditions and liquid - to - cell ratio regimes . cultures were examined for cell viability , function and proliferation to confluent monolayers . A549 cells cultured at an air - interface in a microdevice was also tested for their ability to maintain cell phenotype and function . results : the single - layer differential flow microdevice allowed for a systematic determination of the optimal growth conditions of various lung - specific cell types in a microfluidic environment . our device showed a greater surfactant based decrease in surface tension of the alveolar hypophase in A549 cultures exposed to air as compared to submerged cultures . conclusions : we have successfully developed biomimetic microfluidic devices that specifically allow stable alveolar cell growth at the air - liquid interface . this work serves prerequisite towards an implantable artificial alveolar membrane . 
fundamental research in fluid flow characteristics in micro-tubes are required for designing microfluidic systems . In this study , poiseuille number , the product of friction factor and reynolds number ( f Re ) for quasi-fully developed micro-tube flows , was obtained for slip flow regime . the numerical methodology was based on the Arbitrary-Lagrangian-Eulerian ( ALE ) method and the uncertainties of the results were assessed based on the grid convergence index ( GCI ) . the numerical model was validated with the available experimental and numerical results . the compressible momentum and energy equations were solved for a wide range of reynolds and mach numbers with two thermal boundary conditions : constant wall temperature ( CWT ) , and constant heat flux ( CHF ) , respectively . the slip boundary conditions and their numerical implementation are appropriately documented . the tube diameter ranged from <nUm> to <nUm> m and the tube aspect ratio was <nUm> . the stagnation pressure was chosen in such a way that the exit mach number ranged from <nUm> - <nUm> . the outlet pressure was fixed at the atmospheric condition . it was found that for the case of compressible and slip flows , f Re correlations are functions of the mach and knudsen numbers , and are different from the values obtained from the expression , <nUm> / ( 1+8Kn ) , available for the incompressible slip flow regime . the f Re correlations obtained here are applicable to both no - slip and slip conditions , and for both incompressible and compressible flows . the results are in excellent agreement with the available experimental data . 
A novel targeted application of tissue engineering is the development of an in vitro 3D tissue model for drug screening and toxicology . this paper discusses the modeling , design , and freeform fabrication of 3D cell - embedded tissue constructs for creating a pharmacokinetic model . this is achieved using a combinatorial setup involving a CAD - driven automated syringe - based , layered direct cell writing process in conjunction with soft lithographic micro-patterning techniques . this enables the rational design of a microscale in vitro device housing a bioprinted 3D tissue construct ( or micro-organ ) that biomimics the cell 's physiological microenvironment for enhanced functionality . this paper specifically addresses issues related to the development and implementation of a unique direct cell writing process for biofabrication of 3D cell - encapsulated hydrogel - based tissue constructs with defined patterns , the direct integration onto a microfluidic device , and the perfusion of the 3D tissue constructs for pharmacokinetic study . micron - sized features enables the achievement of large hydrodynamic shear forces on our tissue constructs while preserving predictable laminar flow regimes . it has been demonstrated in literature that these shear stresses serve as mechanical stimuli which cells mechanotransduce to influence drug response . the motivation for the design and modeling of the bioprinted flow pattern is to predict , tune , and optimize the metabolic drug response of 3D bio-printed liver tissue to hydrodynamic perturbations under varying experimental flow conditions and structural flow patterns . 
we present a nondestructive method to accurately characterize low analyte concentrations ( 0-10 molecules ) in nanometer - scale lipid vesicles . our approach is based on the application of fluorescence fluctuation analysis ( FFA ) and multiangle laser light scattering ( MALLS ) in conjunction with asymmetric field flow fractionation ( AFFF ) to measure the entrapment efficiency ( the ratio of the concentration of encapsulated dye to the initial bulk concentration ) of an ensemble of liposomes with an average diameter less than <nUm> nm . water - soluble sulforhodamine B ( SRB ) was loaded into the aqueous interior of nanoscale liposomes synthesized in a microfluidic device . A confocal microscope was used to detect a laser - induced fluorescence signal resulting from both encapsulated and unencapsulated SRB molecules . the first two cumulants of this signal along with the autocorrelation function ( ACF ) were used to quantify liposome entrapment efficiency . our analysis moves beyond typical , nonphysical assumptions of equal liposome size and brightness . these advances are essential for characterizing liposomes in the single - molecule encapsulation regime . our work has further analytical impact because it could increase the interrogation time of free - solution molecular analysis by an order of magnitude and form the basis for the development of liposome standard reference materials . 
microfluidics is a technology where application span the biomedical field and beyond . single cell analysis , tissue engineering , capillary electrophoresis , cancer detection , and immunoassays are just some of the applications within the medical field where microfluidics have excelled . the development of microfluidic technology has lead to novel research into fuel cells , ink jet printing , microreactors and electronic component cooling areas as diverse as food , pharmaceutics , cosmetics , medicine and biotechnology have benefited from these developments . since laminar flow is prevailing at most flow regimes in the micro-scale , thorough mixing is a challenge within microfluidics . therefore , understanding the flow fields on the micro-scale is key to the development of methods for successfully microfluidic mixing applications . 
particle migration is a relevant transport mechanism whenever suspensions flow in channels with gap size comparable to particle dimensions ( e.g. microfluidic devices ) . several theoretical as well as experimental studies have been performed on this topic , showing that the occurring of this phenomenon and the migration direction are related to particle size , flow rate , and the nature of the suspending liquid . In this work we perform a systematic analysis on the migration of a single particle in a sheared viscoelastic fluid through 2D finite element simulations in a couette planar geometry . to focus on the effects of viscoelasticity alone , inertia is neglected . the suspending medium is modeled as a giesekus fluid . an ALE particle mover is combined with a DEVSS / SUPG formulation with a log - representation of the conformation tensor giving stable and convergent results up to high flow rates . to optimize the computational effort and reduce the remeshing and projection steps , needed as soon as the mesh becomes too distorted , a ' backprojection ' of the flow fields is performed , through which the particle in fact moves along the cross-streamline direction only , and the mesh distortion is hence drastically reduced . our results , in agreement with recent experimental data , show a migration towards the closest walls , regardless of the fluid and geometrical parameters . the phenomenon is enhanced by the fluid elasticity , the shear thinning and strong confinements . the migration velocity trends show the existence of a master curve governing the particle dynamics in the whole channel . three different regimes experienced by the particle are recognized , related to the particle - wall distance . the existence of a unique migration behavior and its qualitative aspects do not change by varying the fluid parameters or the particle size . 
the ineffective mixing in microchannel mixers or reactors , primarily due to the laminar flow behavior in such microfluidic devices , has become an issue of significant interest to many researchers working in the field of microreaction engineering and related disciplines . the present study describes the numerical and experimental investigation of mixing performance in a proposed multilaminated / elongational flow micromixer ( herein referred to as MEFM-4 ) and a standard t-junction micromixer ( TjM ) . these two micromixers that employ different mixing enhancement strategies were fabricated from silicon using micro-electromechanical systems ( MEMS ) technology . computational fluid dynamics ( CFD ) approach was first used to establish the experimental platform for the mixing study . tracer experiment utilizing UV - vis absorption spectroscopy detection technique was used to obtain the required concentration data for residence - time distribution ( RTD ) analysis . the RTD and its coefficient of variation ( CoV ) were used for indirect characterization of flow and mixing behavior in the micromixers . using this measure , the proposed MEFM-4 , as expected , exhibits a better mixing performance ( with its narrower RTD and lower CoV values ) than the standard TjM . the comparison of results from the CFD simulation and the experiment shows very good agreement , especially in the low reynolds number flow regime ( Re < <nUm> ) . In combination with matching experiment and advanced microfabrication techniques , CFD simulation is a powerful tool for effective design and evaluation of simple to complex microfluidic devices for useful applications in chemical analysis and synthesis . 
stirring and sedimentation of solid inertial particles in low-Reynolds-number flows has acquired great relevance in multiple environmental , industrial and microfluidic systems , but few detailed numerical studies have focused on chaotically advected experimentally realizable flows . we carry out one - way coupling simulations to study the dynamics of inertial particles in the steady three - dimensional flow in a cylindrical container with exactly counter-rotating lids , which was recently studied by lackey & sotiropoulos ( phys. fluids , vol. <nUm> , <nUm> , paper no. <nUm> ) . we elucidate the rich lagrangian dynamics of the flow in the vicinity of toroidal invariant regions and show that depending on the stokes number inertial particles could get trapped for long times in different equilibrium positions inside integrable islands . In the chaotically advected region of the flow the balance between inertia and gravity forces ( represented by the settling velocity ) can produce a striking fractal sedimentation regime , characterized by a sequence of discrete deposition events of seemingly random number of particles separated by hiatuses of random duration . the resulting staircase - like distribution of the time series of the number of particles in suspension is shown to be a devil 's staircase whose fractal dimension is equal to the <nUm> value found in multiple dissipative dynamical systems in nature . our work sheds new light on the complex mechanisms governing the stirring and deposition of inertial particles and provides new information about the parameters that are relevant in the characterization of particle dynamics in different regions of chaotically advected flows . 
microfluidic flow focusing devices ( mFFD ) are currently used to produce microdroplets and emulsions . recently , it has been demonstrated that they are well adapted to the encapsulation of biologic objects like proteins and cells . liquids used for encapsulation are most of the time dilute polymeric solutions with relatively low viscosity . however , investigations have started to assess the possibility of encapsulation with more concentrated solutions , like semi-dilute solutions of alginates . In this work , we analyze the behavior of highly viscous alginate solutions in pressure actuated FFDs . experiments have been performed using alginate solutions with a viscosity up to <nUm> times that of water . In parallel , an analytical model of the flow in the different branches of the FFD has been derived that explains the limits of the droplet regime . this model can be used to produce scaling rules for FFDs , facilitating the dimensioning of FFDs according to the desired size of the capsules . finally , an example of encapsulation of jurkat cells in a high viscosity keltone alginate capsule is given . 
coupling low - flow analytical separation instrumentation such as capillary electrophoresis , capillary electrochromatography , nano-HPLC , and microfluidic - based devices with electrospray ionization mass spectrometry has yielded powerful analytical tools . however , conventional coupling methodologies such as nanospray suffer from limitations including poor conductive coating robustness , constant clogging , complicated fabrication processes , and incompatibility with large flow rate regimes . this study demonstrates that robust nanospray emitters can be fabricated through the formation and utilization of a porous polymer monolith ( PPM ) at the end of a fused - silica capillary . stable electrosprays can be produced from capillaries ( 75-100-mm i.d. ) at a variety of flow rates ( 50-1000 nL / min ) without the need to taper the capillaries by etching or pulling . the PPM is photopatterned to be present only near the capillary exit aperture using conditions that generate pore sizes similar to those seen with nanospray tips . the porous nature of the PPM aids in developing a stable electrospray generating a single clearly visible taylor cone at relatively high flow rates while at low flow rates ( < <nUm> nL / min ) a mist , presumably from multiple small taylor cones , develops . the hydrophobic nature of the PPM should limit problems with band broadening associated with droplet spreading at the capillary exit , while the multiple flow paths inherent in the PPM minimize clogging problems associated with conventional nanospray emitters . total ion current traces for a constant infusion of standard PPG and cytochrome c solutions are very stable with deviations ranging from only <nUm> to <nUm> % . the PPM - assisted electrospray produces mass spectra with excellent signal - to - noise ratios from only a few femtomoles of material . 
due to their small dimensions , microfluidic devices operate in the low reynolds number regime . In this case , the hydrodynamics is governed by the viscosity rather than inertia and special elements have to be introduced into the system for mixing and pumping of fluids . here we report on the realization of an effective pumping device that mimics a ciliated surface and imitates its motion to generate fluid flow . the artificial biomimetic cilia are constructed as long chains of spherical superparamagnetic particles , which self - assemble in an external magnetic field . magnetic field is also used to actuate the cilia in a simple nonreciprocal manner , resulting in a fluid flow . we prove the concept by measuring the velocity of a cilia - pumped fluid as a function of height above the ciliated surface and investigate the influence of the beating asymmetry on the pumping performance . A numerical simulation was carried out that successfully reproduced the experimentally obtained data . 
self - terminating electrochemical fabrication was used within a microfluidic channel to create a junction between two Au electrodes separated by a gap of <nUm> mm . during the electrochemical process of etching from the anode to deposition at the cathode , flow could be applied in the anode - to - cathode direction . without applied flow , dendritic growth and dense branching morphologies were typically observed at the cathode . the addition of applied flow resulted in a densely packed gold structure that filled the channel . A computer simulation was developed to explore regimes where the diffusion , flow , and electric field between the electrodes individually dominated growth . the model provided good qualitative agreement relating flow to the experimental results . the model was also used to contrast the effects of open and closed boundaries and electric field strength , as factors related to tapering . 
this paper explores the particle - level dynamics involved in the capture of gently flowing microparticles on adhesive planar surfaces , governed by electrostatic interactions . the work focuses on conditions which produce sustained microparticle rolling , useful for the development of microfluidic devices which steer analyte particles and cells for manipulation and separation . In the regime where particle - surface interactions dominate particle - particle interactions , capture of individual negative silica microspheres , for thousands of microspheres , is studied on three model surfaces : negative silica , a flat polycation layer adsorbed on silica producing a strong positive charge , and an electrostatically patchy surface containing <nUm> % areal coverage of flat <nUm> nm polycation coils . the patchy surface possesses a net negative charge close to that of bare silica.On the patchy surface , sustained rolling is observed for a substantial population of <nUm> mm silica particles , the ones which happened to diffuse close to the surface . here , the velocity is near <nUm> mm / s ( for a wall shear of <nUm> s-1 . ) run lengths for particle rolling exceed several hundred micrometers ( usually exceeding the length of the microscopic field of view ) , with more particles escaping diffusively from the interface than permanently arresting . by contrast , firm particle arrest , with very few instances of rolling and a short run length when rolling did occur , was observed on the fully cationic surface . on the bare silica surface , a small rolling population was observed ; however , the average run length was shorter than on the patchy surface . this study demonstrated how a patchy surface that produces adhesion through localized attractions can facilitate rolling in a shear field . the physicochemical heterogeneity acts like a surface roughness or a rapidly binding ligand - receptor pair , transferring stress and imparting torque across the interface . 
we report two novel microfluidic devices fabricated from PDMS ( polydimethylsiloxane ) . such devices are indicative of the increasing migration of microfluidics to materials distinct from those of the mainstream silicon MEMS industry . specifically , plastics fabrication techniques and materials such as SU8 photostructurable epoxy and microcasting , which are employed in these examples , are proving particularly topical and are discussed here . the devices reported consist of PDMS-glass-piezoelectric hybrids exploiting the compliant nature of elastomer substrates to yield valuable functionality . the first device is a micropump employing novel , non-sealing valves and pumping <nUm> microlitres per minute and developing a maximum pressure of <nUm> kPa . the second reported device is a micromixer employing temporal interleaving of samples via PDMS - glass microvalves in order to mix effectively within the laminar , microfluidic flow regime . 
A facile and high performance biosensing platform using aligned carbon nanotubes on quartz substrate is reported in this communication . single walled carbon nanotubes are grown on quartz substrates by a chemical vapor deposition process and are characterized with field emission scanning electron microscopy and atomic force microscopy in order to verify the quality of the material . the quartz substrate is then directly used as a biosensor in a field effect transistor configuration . In order to demonstrate the sensing capabilities of the fabricated sensor devices , electronic detection of prostate specific antigen , a potential cancer biomarker , is carried out by adopting liquid gated configuration . A conductivity change due to the specific binding of target antigen with the immobilized receptor antibody demonstrates the sensing capabilities of the fabricated device . Sub-nM detection sensitivities have been obtained using the adopted direct immunoassay approach , which shows that the device responds to clinically relevant concentration regimes . 
we have considered a homogeneously aligned liquid crystal ( HALC ) microvolume , confined between two infinitely long horizontal coaxial cylinders subjected to both a temperature gradient [?]T and radially applied electric field e . we have investigated dynamic field pumping , i.e. studied the interaction between director , velocity , electric fields , as well as , a radially applied temperature gradient , where the inner cylinder is kept at a lower temperature than the outer one . flexoelectric polarization P has been taken into account as well , and modeled via the classical meyer treatment . In order to elucidate the role of [?]T , e , and P in producing hydrodynamic flow , we have carried out a numerical study of a system of hydrodynamic equations including director reorientation , fluid flow , and temperature redistribution across the HALC cavity . calculations show that there exists a range of parameter values ( voltage and curvature of the inner cylinder ) producing a kinklike orientation process in the system , as well as a nonstandard pumping regime with maximum flow near the hot cylinder . 
microband arrays improve the analytical performance and information content of electrochemical detection in flow channel relative to single - electrode configurations . however , exploiting their full advantages requires a detailed understanding of the properties of arrays , which depend on their geometry and on the hydrodynamic regimes established inside the microfluidic channel . this paper investigates the influence of two main operating situations ( sequential and coupling regimes ) on steady - state amperometric responses of microband arrays performing under laminar flow conditions . simulations and experimental measurements showed that the resulting properties of the arrays are a function of the number of electrodes and average ratio between gaps and electrode widths , whether the layout of the arrays is regular or not . since the contribution of each electrode can be finely tailored , this allows the arrays to be designed and adapted to a wide variety of experimental demands . 
In this contribution we present the design , fabrication and measurement results of a novel hydrodynamically 3D adjustable lens chip fabricated by rapid prototyping . to our knowledge this is the first time a reconfigurable three - dimensional liquid- core liquid - cladding lens chip is manufactured in transparent photopolymer resin by micro laser stereolithography . the laminar flow regime in the microchannels and the application of fluids with different refractive indices enable the formation of optofluidic elements . the unique features of this optical chip offer a novel 3D light focusing system useable for optical cell detection fabricated by fast prototyping . 
fluid transport in microfluidic systems typically is laminar due to the low reynolds number characteristic of the flow . the inclusion of suspended polymers imparts elasticity to fluids , allowing instabilities to be excited when substantial polymer stretching occurs . for high molecular weight polymer chains we find that flow velocities achievable by standard electro-osmotic pumping are sufficient to excite extensional instabilities in dilute polymer solutions . we observe a dependence in measured fluctuations on polymer concentration which plateaus at a threshold corresponding to the onset of significant molecular crowding in macromolecular solutions ; plateauing occurs well below the overlap concentration . our results show that electro-osmotic flows of complex fluids are disturbed from the steady regime , suggesting potential for enhanced mixing and requiring care in modeling the flow of complex liquids such as biopolymer suspensions . 
suspensions of solid particles in liquids are often made to flow in devices with characteristic dimensions comparable to that of the suspended particles , the so - called confined situation , as in the case of several microfluidic applications . combination of confinement with viscoelasticity of the suspending liquid can lead to peculiar effects . In this paper we present the first 3D simulation of the dynamics of a particle suspended in a viscoelastic liquid under imposed confined shear flow . the full system of equations is solved through the finite element method . A DEVSS / SUPG formulation with a log - representation of the conformation tensor is implemented , assuring stable and convergent results up to high flow rates . particle motion is handled through an ALE formulation . to optimize the computational effort and to reduce the remeshing and projection steps required when the mesh becomes too distorted , a rigid motion of the grid in the flow direction is performed , so that , in fact , the particle moves along the cross-streamline direction only.Confinement and viscoelasticity are found to induce particle migration , i.e. , transverse motion across the main flow direction , towards the closest wall . under continuous shearing , three different dynamical regimes are recognized , related to the particle - wall distance . A simple heuristic argument is given to link the cross-flow migration to normal stresses in the suspending liquid.The analysis is then extended to a time - dependent shear flow imposed by periodically inverting the direction of wall motion . A slower migration is found for higher forcing frequency . A peculiar effect arises if the inversion period is chosen close to the fluid relaxation time : the migration velocity oscillates around zero , and the overall migration is suppressed . such novel prediction of a dynamic instability scenario , with the particle escaping the center plane of the channel , and many features of the computed results , are in nice agreement with recent experiments reported in the literature [14] . 
the aim of this paper is to investigate the squeezing - to - dripping transition for bubble formation in a microfluidic t-junction by cross-flowing rupture technique using a high - speed digital camera . experiments were conducted in a glass microfluidic t-junction with the cross-section of the microchannel of <nUm> mm wide and <nUm> mm deep . N bubbles were generated in glycerol - water mixtures with several concentrations of surfactant sodium dodecyl sulfate ( SDS ) . three different regimes were identified for generating different kinds of bubbles : squeezing , dripping and transition regimes . various forces exerted on the gaseous thread in different regimes were analyzed . long slug bubbles were formed in the squeezing regime , while dispersed bubbles in the dripping regime . the transition regime formed short slug bubbles . the bubble sizes in various regimes could be correlated with several dimensionless numbers such as the ratio of gas / liquid flow rates and capillary number . the two - step model for droplets ( steegmans et al. , <nUm> ) was extended to describe the bubble formation . 
experimental two - phase invasion percolation flow patterns were observed in hydrophobic microporous networks designed to model the operational conditions encountered in the porous electrodes of polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells . the microporous networks were fabricated mimicking the small thickness of porous electrodes and their pore distributions . the inlet channels were invaded homogeneously with flow rates corresponding to fuel cell current densities of 1.0- <nUm> A / cm2 ( Ca 10-7 - 10-8 ) . A variety of fractal breakthrough patterns were observed and analyzed to quantify flooding density and geometrical diversity in terms of the total saturation , S t , local saturations , s , and fractal dimension , d . st increased monotonically during the invasion process until the breakthrough point was reached , and s profiles indicated the dynamic distribution of the liquid phase during the process . fractal analysis confirmed that the experiments fall within the flow regime of invasion percolation with trapping ( IPT ) . fractal dimensions of different IPT flow patterns spanned an interval of <nUm> - <nUm> depending on the flow rate of invasion . In this work , we proposed to correlate the fractal dimension to the total saturation and use this map as a parameter for modeling liquid water transport in porous electrodes . 
In migrating cells , retrograde flow of the actin cytoskeleton is related to traction at adhesion sites located at the base of the lamellipodium . the coupling between the moving cytoskeleton and the stationary adhesions is mediated by the continuous association and dissociation of molecular bonds . we introduce a simple model for the competition between the stochastic dynamics of elastic bonds at the moving interface and relaxation within the moving actin cytoskeleton represented by an internal viscous friction coefficient . using exact stochastic simulations and an analytical mean field theory , we show that the stochastic bond dynamics lead to biphasic friction laws as observed experimentally . At low internal dissipation , stochastic bond dynamics lead to a regime of irregular stick - and - slip motion . high internal dissipation effectively suppresses cooperative effects among bonds and hence stabilizes the adhesion . 
microelectroosmotic flow is usually restricted to low reynolds number regime , and mixing in these microfluidic systems becomes problematic due to the negligible inertial effects . to gain an improved understanding of mixing enhancement in microchannels patterned with heterogeneous surface charge , the lattice boltzmann method has been employed to obtain the electric potential distribution in the electrolyte , the flow field , and the species concentration distribution , respectively . the simulation results show that heterogeneous surfaces can significantly disturb the streamlines leading to apparently substantial improvements in mixing . however , the introduction of such a feature can reduce the mass flow rate in the channel . the reduction in flow rate effectively prolongs the available mixing time when the flow passes through the channel and the observed mixing enhancement by heterogeneous surfaces partly results from longer mixing time . 
we investigate the formation of unilamellar lipid vesicles ( liposomes ) with diameters of tens of nanometers by controlled microfluidic mixing and nanoparticle determination ( COMMAND ) . our study includes liposome synthesis experiments and numerical modeling of our microfluidic implementation of the batch solvent injection method . we consider microfluidic liposome formation from the perspective of fluid interfaces and convective - diffusive mixing , as we find that bulk fluid flow parameters including hydrodynamically focused alcohol stream width , final alcohol concentration , and shear stress do not primarily determine the vesicle formation process . microfluidic device geometry in conjunction with hydrodynamic flow focusing strongly influences vesicle size distributions , providing a coarse method to control liposome size , while total flow rate allows fine - tuning the vesicle size in certain focusing regimes . although microfluidic liposome synthesis is relatively simple to implement experimentally , numerical simulations of the mixing process reveal a complex system of fluid flow and mass transfer determining the formation of nonequilibrium vesicles . these results expand our understanding of the microfluidic environment that controls liposome self - assembly and yield several technological advances for the on - chip synthesis of nanoscale lipid vesicles . 
the fluid - structure interaction of resonating microcantilevers immersed in fluid has been widely studied and is a cornerstone in nanomechanical sensor development . In many applications , fluid damping imposes severe limitations by strongly degrading the signal - to - noise ratio of measurements . recently , burg et al. ( nature , vol. <nUm> , <nUm> , pp . 1066-1069 ) proposed an alternative type of microcantilever device whereby a microfluidic channel was embedded inside the cantilever with vacuum outside . remarkably , it was observed that energy dissipation in these systems was almost identical when air or liquid was passed through the channel and was <nUm> orders of magnitude lower than that in conventional microcantilever systems . here , we study the fluid dynamics of these devices and present a rigorous theoretical model corroborated by experimental measurements to explain these observations . In so doing , we elucidate the dominant physical mechanisms giving rise to the unique features of these devices . significantly , it is found that energy dissipation is not a monotonic function of fluid viscosity , but exhibits oscillatory behaviour , as fluid viscosity is increased / decreased . In the regime of low viscosity , inertia dominates the fluid motion inside the cantilever , resulting in thin viscous boundary layers - this leads to an increase in energy dissipation with increasing viscosity . In the high - viscosity regime , the boundary layers on all surfaces merge , leading to a decrease in dissipation with increasing viscosity . effects of fluid compressibility also become significant in this latter regime and lead to rich flow behaviour . A direct consequence of these findings is that miniaturization does not necessarily result in degradation in the quality factor , which may indeed be enhanced . this highly desirable feature is unprecedented in current nanomechanical devices and permits direct miniaturization to enhance sensitivity to environmental changes , such as mass variations , in liquid . 
the formation of bubbles in a flow - focusing ( FF ) junction comprising multiple rectangular sections is described . the simplest junctions comprise two sections ( throat and orifice ) . systematic investigation of the influence on the formation of bubbles of the flow of liquid and the geometry of the junction identifies regimes that generate monodisperse , bidisperse , and tridisperse trains of bubbles . the mechanisms by which these junctions form monodisperse and bidisperse bubbles are inferred from the shapes of the gas thread during breakup : these mechanisms differ primarily by the process in which the gas thread collapses in the throat and / or orifice . the dynamic selfassembly of bidisperse bubbles leads to unexpected groupings of bubbles during their flow along the outlet channel . 
In present study , the navier - stokes equations and the burnett equations with maxwell - smoluchowski slip conditions for some values of knudsen number are used to resolve the viscous compressible fluid flow of air in the stepped microchannel . an explicit finite difference scheme is employed to develop a two - dimensionl numerical burnett solver for microfluidic flows and the second order stresses and heat fluxes in the burnett equations are implemented into the code . velocity slip / temperature jump conditions on the wall of the channel and on the step within duct are also used . results are compared with those obtained by using the navier - stokes equations with and without the slip - wall conditions using flow in a microchannel . the effects of knudsen number on the flow and the heat transfer characteristics of the microchannel are also investigated . 
this paper presents various flow structures related to velocity slip and temperature jump in very low reynolds number gas flow . the structures differ significantly from the ones observed in continuum regime for laminar flow , especially if the geometry has complex structure , which is very often the case in microfluidic devices . we are modelling the flow as a continuum navier - stokes gas flow with additional velocity slip and temperature jump boundary conditions for curved surfaces for slip flows with knudsen numbers kn < <nUm> . for complex channel geometries with obstacles and curved walls vortex patterns are observed that are related to the thermal stress slip flow . this type of flow is induced only when non-uniform temperature distributions inside flow domains are present . the investigated geometries consist of one or more cylinder walls with diameters of up to a few <nUm> mm placed inside of confined microchannels , with all setups being two - dimensional . In gaseous microdevices the resulting complex flow patterns can be utilised to enhance mixing or heat transfer . ( table presented ) 
pore network modelling has traditionally been used to study displacement processes in idealized porous media related to geological flows , with applications ranging from groundwater hydrology to enhanced oil recovery . very recently , pore network modelling has been applied to model the gas diffusion layer ( GDL ) of a polymer electrolyte membrane ( PEM ) fuel cell . discrete pore network models have the potential to elucidate transport phenomena in the GDL with high computational efficiency , in contrast to continuum or molecular dynamics modelling that require extensive computational resources . however , the challenge in studying the GDL with pore network modelling lies in defining the network parameters that accurately describe the porous media as well as the conditions of fluid invasion that represent realistic transport processes . In this work , we discuss the first stage of developing and validating a GDL - representative pore network model . we begin with a two - dimensional pore network model with a single mobile phase invading a hydrophobic media , whereby the slow capillary dominated flow process follows invasion percolation . pore network geometries are designed , and transparent hydrophobic microfluidic networks are fabricated from silicon elastomer PDMS using a soft lithography technique . these microfluidic networks are designed to have channel size distributions and wettability properties of typical GDL materials . comparisons between the numerical and experimental flow patterns show reasonable agreement . furthermore , the fractal dimension and saturation are measured during invasion , revealing different operating regimes that can be applied to GDL operation . future work for model development will also be discussed . 
liquid - liquid segmented flows in microchannels fabricated on polymer test chips were investigated experimentally . polymer test chips were prepared using hot embossing of polycarbonate ( PC ) sheets with micro-milled brass mold inserts . three different configurations of microchannels were prepared with injection to test channels expansion ratios of <nUm> , <nUm> and <nUm> and a fixed test channel geometry . deionized water with blue food - coloring dye ( <nUm> % v / v ) was used as a dispersed fluid at flow rates ( QD ) between <nUm> and <nUm> ml / min . the carrier fluid was perfluorocarbon ( FC <nUm> ) with nonionic fluorous - soluble surfactant ( perfluorooctanol , <nUm> % v / v ) at flow rates ( QC ) between <nUm> and <nUm> m1 / min . the two fluids were injected separately into the chips . droplet and plug flows with transient irregular segmented flows between two flow regimes were mainly observed in the test channels of the three different chips . flow pattern maps and transitions between flow regimes were determined in terms of a fixed homogeneous carrier fluid volumetric flow ratio ( bC ) to compare the effect of the expansion ratios from the injection to the test channels . the droplet and plug regimes were shifted to higher carrier and lower dispersed fluid superficial velocities and the plug flow regime was broader with the lower expansion ratio channels . the transient irregular segmented flow was favored in the higher expansion channel ratio and the interval of transient irregular segmented flow between droplet and plug flow regimes were shorter for the low expansion channel ratios . this is evidence that flow regime maps in micro-channels are not universal and depend on the configuration part of the microinjection system . the length of the dispersed segmented flows and the distance between consecutive droplets or plugs as a function of bC were determined by image processing of frames acquired via CCD camera with bright field illumination . the average length of the dispersed fluid was shown to scale approximately with bC to the <nUm> power . velocities of the dispersed droplet and plug flows were measured using double - pulsed laser illumination and were found to be <nUm> ± <nUm> and <nUm> ± <nUm> times faster than the superficial velocity of the segmented flow respectively . two - phase pressure drop measurements were also carried out for all flow regimes and associated trends were correlated with changes in flow topology . comparisons of experimental pressure drop with the predictions for a modified lockhart - martinelli correlation were also made . 
the work in question addresses the issue of continuous flow particle manipulation in liquid media with particular emphasis on particles with micron and sub-micron dimensions . the subject is of significant relevance for a range of biotechnological applications and in particular for lab - on - chip ones . particle manipulation utilizing interface acoustic waves ( IAW ) is proposed for the first time . manipulation of submicron sized particles is successfully demonstrated in a streaming free regime . 
addition of surfactants to liquids helps to eliminate intermittent two - phase flow patterns and alleviate flow instability . these features are very desirable for two - phase microfluidic applications . however , very little information is available on two - phase flow patterns of surfactant solution in the microchannels . the present paper reports a study of adiabatic two - phase flow with surfactants in a circular microchannel of a 180-mm diameter . air - water mixtures with trace quantities of sodium dodecyl sulfate ( SDS ) were used in the experiments . the maximum superficial velocities measured were <nUm> m / s for the liquid and <nUm> m / s for the gas . high - speed photographic technique was employed to visualize various two - phase flow patterns and to identify the transition boundaries between different flow regimes . the results were compared to data obtained from air - water flow without surfactants . it was found that addition of surfactants brings in significant modification to the two - phase flow regimes as well as their transition characteristics in microchannels ; in particular , slug flow is effectively suppressed . 
we introduce a chaotic serpentine mixer ( CSM ) , which is motivated by the three - dimensional serpentine channel [ liu et al. , <nUm> , J. microelectromech . syst. <nUm> , pp . 190-197 ] , and demonstrate a systematic way of utilizing the mapping method [ singh et al. , <nUm> , microfluid nanofluid <nUm> , pp . 313-325 ] to find out an optimal set of design variables for the new mixer . the new mixer shows globally chaotic mixing even in the stokes flow regime , while maintaining the benefits of the original design . one geometrical period of the mixer consists of two functional units , inducing two flow portraits with crossing streamlines . each half period of the mixer consists of an " l-shaped " bend and a bypass channel . the two flow portraits may be either co-rotational or counter-rotational . As a preliminary study , first of all , mixing in the original serpentine channel has been analyzed to demonstrate the flow characteristics and to find out a critical reynolds number showing chaotic mixing above the limit . the working principle of the newly proposed mixer is explained by the manifold of the deforming interface between two fluids . to optimize the mixer , we choose three key design variables : the sense of rotation of the two flows , the aspect ratio of the rectangular channel , and the lateral location of the bypass channel . then , simulations for all possible combinations of the variables are carried out . At proper combinations of the variables , almost global chaotic mixing is observed in the creeping flow regime . the design windows , provided as a result of the parameter study , can be used to determine a proper set of the design variables to fit with a specific application . the deforming interface of the two fluids shows that , even in a poor mixer in stokes flow regime , as the reynolds number increases , more efficient mixing is resulted in due to the enhanced cross-sectional vertical motion and back flows near the bends . 
In recent years , microfluidic devices that generate micron sized droplets / bubbles have found widespread applications in drug delivery , microanalysis , tumor destruction , as ultrasound agents and in chemical reactions at the micron level . In the current work , simulations results are being presented for a t-junction device for formation of micron - sized droplets using the lattice boltzmann method . In this work , the key parameters of interest for estimating the frequency and volume of the generated droplets are the flow rates and viscosities of the two fluids , and the geometry of the flow channel . simulations at low capillary number indicate that droplets formed occupy the whole volume of the main channel and undergo a squeezing regime . At higher Ca , droplets of size smaller man the width of the channel are formed , and the frequency is dependent on the flow rates of the two liquids . the effect of the width of the dispersed and continuous phase channels is also investigated . 
the development of MEMS requires deliberate designs for controlling fluids in the low reynolds number regime . arranging surface charges in rectangular channels to obtain inplane or out - of - plane vortices have been studied by previous researchers . however , previous surface modification techniques require different signs of zeta potentials from the other wall surfaces which made it difficult in selecting and coating microchannels . previously , the opposite polarities are usually adjusted by changing the pH value of the solution with acid chemicals in other researches which made the solution complicated and difficult to simulate a real application . meanwhile the acid chemicals may also destroy the coating . it is convenient to use same polarity patches if a vortex flow can also be generated . however , it is not clear if the patterned surface charges have the same polarity of zeta potentials as the other walls , what kind flow pattern will be generated and what mechanism behind the flow pattern . furthermore , the cross-section of previously studied microchannels is usually limited to a rectangular shape . therefore , the surface charge patterns are usually in 2D since the sidewalls of the rectangular microchannels are difficult to be patterned . however , a channel with round cross-section has better leak - proof performance of the membrane valve . furthermore , a round channel is also advantageous in mimicking the human vein when a vascular structure is needed in tissue scaffolding , the round microfluidic channel is considered as a good candidate for an artificial capillary vessel . it is anticipated that there will be no stagnation occurs at the corner edges , which occurs at the corners of a rectangular channel , for a round microchannel owing to the perfectly symmetrical velocity profile . this is important when the microfluidic chip is subjected to a separation process such as liquid chromatography . In this paper , effects of patterned surface modification on 3D vortex flows generation in a micro capillary tube under very low reynolds number have been investigated . microfabrication technology was successfully employed to pattern surface charges on inner surfaces of round capillary tubes , which form non-uniform zeta-potentials . this technique extends the heterogeneous surfaces from flat surface to curved surface . 3D vortices are visualized and measured at the vicinity of tube walls when an electric field is applied across the surfaces utilizing micro resolution PIV . it demonstrated that 3D vortices can also be generated by the patterned surface charges with a same polarity . experimental results have been compared with the numerical simulations using CFD - ACE+ . 
despite the prevalence of microfluidic - based heterogeneous immunoassays , there is incomplete understanding of analyte capture parameters . this study presents computational results and corresponding experimental binding assays of analyte capture . our results identify : <nUm> ) a " reagent - limited " regime , under constraints of finite sample volume and assay time ; <nUm> ) a critical flow rate ; <nUm> ) an increase in signal by using a short concentrated plug rather than a long dilute plug ; <nUm> ) a requirement to eventually reach a reaction - limited operating regime to maximize the capture of analytes [1] . 
the flow of polymer solutions in microfluidic devices is inherently three - dimensional , especially in the non-linear flow regime , and often results in flow phenomena that might not even be encountered in macro-devices . using a multi-mode Phan-Thien-Tanner model , three - dimensional ( 3-D ) simulations of a semi-dilute polyethylene oxide ( PEO ) solution through <nUm> : <nUm> planar contraction micro-channels with various depths have been carried out to systematically study the effect of the aspect ratio on the flow fields . vortex dynamics in the upstream flow section and excess pressure drop are quantified in detail . A transition from a salient - corner vortex mechanism to a lip vortex mechanism is observed as the aspect ratio is varied from <nUm> to <nUm> / <nUm> , which corresponds to the elasticity numbers el = <nUm> to <nUm> . the numerical results show that varying the aspect ratio of microfluidic channels has similar effects to varying other parameters , such as fluid properties , which influence the elasticity number . thus , our results support the view that vortex growth mechanism is determined by the elasticity number , which is fixed for a given fluid and geometry . the principle is of significance to the design of new microfluidic chips for a wide range of applications . 
wiring the nervous system relies on the interplay of intrinsic and extrinsic signaling molecules that control neurite extension , neuronal polarity , process maturation and experience - dependent refinement . extrinsic signals establish and enrich neuron - neuron interactions during development . understanding how such extrinsic cues direct neurons to establish neural connections in vitro will facilitate the development of organized neural networks for investigating the development and function of nervous system networks . producing ordered networks of neurons with defined connectivity in vitro presents special technical challenges because the results must be compliant with the biological requirements of rewiring neural networks . here we demonstrate the ability to form stable , instructive surface - bound gradients of laminin that guide postnatal hippocampal neuron development in vitro . our work uses a three - channel , interconnected microfluidic device that permits the production of adlayers of planar substrates through the combination of laminar flow , diffusion and physisorption . through simple flow modifications , a variety of patterns and gradients of laminin ( LN ) and fluorescein isothiocyanate- conjugated poly-l-lysine ( FITC - PLL ) were deposited to present neurons with an instructive substratum to guide neuronal development . we present three variations in substrate design that produce distinct growth regimens for postnatal neurons in dispersed cell cultures . In the first approach , diffusion - mediated gradients of LN were formed on cover slips to guide neurons toward increasing LN concentrations . In the second approach , a combined gradient of LN and FITC - PLL was produced using aspiration - driven laminar flow to restrict neuronal growth to a <nUm> m wide growth zone at the center of the two superimposed gradients . the last approach demonstrates the capacity to combine binary lines of FITC - PLL in conjunction with surface gradients of LN and bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) to produce substrate adlayers that provide additional levels of control over growth . this work demonstrates the advantages of spatio-temporal fluid control for patterning surface - bound gradients using a simple microfluidics - based substrate deposition procedure . we anticipate that this microfluidics - based patterning approach will provide instructive patterns and surface - bound gradients to enable a new level of control in guiding neuron development and network formation . 
the terminology novel process window unites different methods to improve existing processes by applying unconventional and harsh process conditions like : process routes at much elevated pressure , much elevated temperature , or processing in a thermal runaway regime to achieve a significant impact on process performance . this paper is a review of parts of IMM 's works in particular the applicability of above mentioned novel process windows on selected chemical reactions . first , general characteristics of microreactors are discussed like excellent mass and heat transfer and improved mixing quality . different types of reactions are presented in which the use of microstructured devices led to an increased process performance by applying novel process windows . these examples were chosen to demonstrate how chemical reactions can benefit from the use of milli- and microstructured devices and how existing protocols can be changed toward process conditions hitherto not applicable in standard laboratory equipment . the used milli- and microstructured reactors can also offer advantages in other areas , for example , high - throughput screening of catalysts and better control of size distribution in a particle synthesis process by improved mixing , etc . the chemical industry is under continuous improvement . so , a lot of research is being done to synthesize high value chemicals , to optimize existing processes in view of process safety and energy consumption and to search for new routes to produce such chemicals . leitmotifs of such undertakings are often sustainable development1 and green chemistry2 . 
dynamic field pumping principle has been developed utilizing the interactions of both the director and velocity fields and temperature- redistribution across a two - dimensional ( 2D ) homogeneously aligned liquid crystal ( HALC ) film under the influence both of a heat flow directed normal to the upper bounding surface , whereas on the lower bounding surface , the temperature is kept constant , and the normally directed electric field , due to electric double layers , i.e. , a shielding layers that is naturally created within the liquid crystal ( LC ) near a charged surfaces . calculations , based on the nonlinear extension of the classical ericksen - leslie theory , shows that the HALC material under the influence of the heat flow start moving in the horizontal direction . after turning off the heat flow , the HALC drop settles down to the rest , and the temperature field across the LC film is finally downfall to the value of temperature on the lower bounding surface . the role of hydrodynamic flow in the relaxation processes of the temperature field to its equilibrium distribution across the 2D HALC film , containing 4- n -pentyl- 4' -cyanobiphenyl , has been investigated for a number of dynamic regimes . 
the effect of shear on the rupture of two stratified thin liquid films confined between parallel plates and subject to van der waals forces is examined in this work . lubrication theory is applied to derive a one - dimensional nonlinear evolution equation for the height of the liquid - liquid interface . linear stability analysis reveals that the real part of the growth rate and the wavelength of the fastest growing interfacial disturbance are unaffected by shear . however , the growth rate has an imaginary part which is non-zero in the presence of shear , indicating the existence of traveling waves . nonlinear simulations of interface behavior on homogeneous surfaces show that shear delays interfacial rupture , and suppression of rupture occurs beyond a critical shear rate . propagation of traveling waves along the interface , and subsequent weakening of van-der-Waals - driven dewetting , is found to be the cause of the rupture delay . analysis of flow on chemically heterogeneous surfaces also suggests a delay in interfacial rupture in the presence of shear . the problem studied here can serve as an idealized model for the lithographic printing process , and the results suggest that in the regime of shear rates relevant to printing , mechanisms of emulsification of one liquid into the other can be understood without incorporating shear . however , shear could be relevant in other physical systems such as nanofluidic and microfluidic flows . 
In the surface tension - dominated microchannel t-junction , droplets can be formed as a result of the mixing of two dissimilar , immiscible fluids . this article presents results for very low capillary numbers and different flow rates of the continuous and dispersed phases . through three - dimensional lattice boltzmann - based simulations , the mechanism of the formation of " plugs " in the squeezing regime has been examined and the size of the droplets quantified . results for rec ≪ <nUm> show the dependence of flow rates of the two fluids on the length of the droplets formed , which is compared with existing experimental data . it is shown that the size of plugs formed decreases as the capillary number increases in the squeezing regime . this article clearly shows that the geometry effect , i.e. , the widths of the two channels and the depth of the assembly , plays an important role in the determination of the length of the plugs , a fact that was ignored in earlier experimental correlations . 
functionalized magnetic beads offer promising solutions to a host of micro-total analysis systems ranging from immunomagnetic biosensors to cell separators . immunochemical binding of functional biochemical agents or target biomolecules serves as a key step in such applications . here we show how magnetophoretic motion of magnetic microspheres in a microchannel is harnessed to promote in situ immunochemical binding of short DNA strands ( probe oligonucleotide ) on the bead surface via streptavidin - biotin bonds . using a transverse magnetic field gradient , the particles are transported across a co-flowing analyte stream containing biotinylated probe oligonucleotides that are labeled with a cy3-fluorophore . quantification of the resulting biotin - streptavidin promoted binding has been achieved through fluorescence imaging of the magnetophoretically separated magnetic particles in a third stream of phosphate buffered saline . both the experimental and numerical data indicate that for a given flow rate , the analyte binding per bead depends on the flow fraction of the co-flowing analyte stream through the microchannel , but not on the fluid viscosity . parametric studies of the effects of fluid viscosity , analyte flow fraction , and total flow rate on the extent of binding and the overall analyte separation rate are also conducted numerically to identify favorable operating regimes of a flow - through immunomagnetic separator for biosensing , cell separation , or high - throughput applications . 
A compressible lattice - boltzmann model coupled with non-equilibrium extrapolation method are adopted to simulate gas flow in microchannels at slip regime ( kn ≤ <nUm> ) . numerical results , including velocity profiles at outlet , pressure distributions and mass flowrates , agree well with analytical solutions and experimental results . In addition , gas flow in a <nUm> degree curved channel is numerically simulated . it shows that boundary layer separation is suppressed by slip velocity at the wall . In addition , mass flowrate of a curved channel is smaller than that of a straight one . 
the goal of this study was to determine laminar pressure loss coefficients for flow in microelbows with circular and trapezoidal cross-sections . flow conditions and pressure losses in these elbows are of interest in microfluidic devices , in porous media , and in other types of microfluidic networks . the literature focuses almost exclusively on loss coefficients due to turbulent flow in macroelbows with very little data on laminar flow in macroelbows . the pressure loss coefficients determined in this study are intended to aid in realistic simulation of existing laminar flow networks or the design of these networks . this study focused on an elbow of constant cross-section with inlet and outlet tubes of sufficient length so as to allow fully developed laminar flow at the entrance to the elbow and at the outlet tube exit . for the circular elbow , both the ratio of elbow radius to inner diameter and inlet reynolds number were allowed to vary over the ranges of <nUm> - <nUm> and 1-2500 , respectively . the laminar pressure loss coefficients were determined by simulating incompressible flow over the range of geometries and reynolds numbers in the commercial CFD software FLUENT . the pressure and velocity distributions in the inlet and outlet tubes were averaged at multiple upstream and downstream positions , and were then used to extrapolate the loss coefficient due to the elbow . the results showed that the loss coefficient for larger ratios tended to be higher , in some cases in excess of <nUm> , at low reynolds number flows , but as the flow approached the transitional regime , the loss coefficients leveled out to roughly their accepted turbulent values of between <nUm> and <nUm> . these results show good qualitative and quantitative agreement with limited laminar elbow experimental data available for macroelbows . for the trapezoidal elbows the loss coefficient levels off to about two for reynolds numbers greater than <nUm> . 
In recent years , microfluidic devices that generate micron sized droplets / bubbles have found widespread applications in drug delivery , microanalysis , tumor destruction , as ultrasound agents and in chemical reactions at the micron level . In the current work , simulations results are being presented for a tjunction device for the formation of micron - sized droplets using the lattice boltzmann method . flow regimes obtained as a consequence of two immiscible fluids interacting at a tjunction are presented for a range of capillary numbers and different flow rates of the continuous and dispersed phases . through lattice boltzmann based simulations , regime maps are presented that distinguish parallel flows from droplet flows . it is shown that as the capillary number increases , the transition zone which separates parallel and droplet flows shrinks , and is influenced by the viscosity ratio as well . 
we study the production and motion of monodisperse double emulsions in microfluidics comprising series co-flow capillaries . both two and three dimensional simulations are performed . flow was determined by dimensionless parameters , i.e. , reynolds number and weber number of continuous and dispersed phases . the co-flow generated droplets are sensitive to the reynolds number and weber number of the continuous phase , but insensitive to those of the disperse phase . because the inner and outer drops are generate by separate co-flow processes , sizes of both inner and outer drops can be controlled by adjusting Re and we for the continuous phase . meanwhile , the disperse phase has little effect on drop size , thus a desirable generation frequency of inner drop can be reached by merely adjusting flow rate of the inner fluid , leading to desirable ,number of inner drops encapsulated by the outer drop . thus highly monodisperse double emulsions are obtained . it was found that only in dripping mode can droplet be of high monodispersity . flow begins to transit from dripping regime to jetting regime when the Re number is decreased or weber number is increased . to ensure that all the droplets are produced over a wide range of running parameters , tiny tapered tip outlet for the disperse flow should be applied . smaller the tapered tip , wider range for Re and we can apply . 
surface tension driven spreading of viscoplastic drops after impact on a solid substrate is investigated experimentally and compared with purely shear - thinning drops . it is shown that the spreading rate is affected independently both by the degree of fluid shear - thinning and by the yield - stress magnitude . moreover , spreading can be inhibited when the yield - stress becomes greater than a critical value , preventing drops from assuming a spherical cap shape with a static contact angle consistent with the young - laplace equation . this critical value can be related to a transition between capillary governed and viscoplastic governed behaviour , with the regime change characterised by the ratio of capillary pressure to yield - stress magnitude . 
the flow behavior of nanostructure clusters , consisting of chemically bonded PbSe quantum dots and magnetic g-Fe2O3 nanoparticles , has been investigated . the clusters are regarded as model nanoplatforms with multiple functionalities , where the g-Fe2O3 magnets serve as transport vehicles , manipulated by an external magnetic field gradient , and the quantum dots act as fluorescence tags within an optical window in the near - infrared regime . the clusters ' flow was characterized by visualizing their trajectories within a viscous fluid ( mimicking a blood stream ) , using an optical imaging method , while the trajectory pictures were analyzed by a specially developed processing package . the trajectories were examined under various flow rates , viscosities and applied magnetic field strengths . the results revealed a control of the trajectories even at low magnetic fields ( < <nUm> T ) , validating the use of similar nanoplatforms as active targeting constituents in personalized medicine . 
A versatile approach for the rapid prototyping of microfluidic devices suitable for use with FT-IR spectroscopic imaging is introduced . device manufacture is based on the direct printing of paraffin onto the surface of an infrared transparent substrate , followed by encapsulation . key features of this approach are low running costs , rapid production times , simplicity of design modifications and suitability for integration with FT-IR spectroscopic measurements . In the current experiments , the minimum width of channel walls was found to be ∼ <nUm> mm and ∼ <nUm> when a <nUm> mm and <nUm> mm spacer is used , respectively . water and poly(ethylene glycol ) are used as model fluids in a laminar flow regime , and are imaged in both transmission and attenuated total reflection ( ATR ) modes . it is established that adoption of transmission mode measurements yields superior sensitivity whilst the ATR mode is more suitable for quantitative analysis using strong spectral absorption bands . results indicate that devices manufactured using this approach are suitable for use with in situ FT-IR spectroscopic imaging . 
In this study , fully developed mixed convective heat transfer of a newtonian fluid in a vertical microannulus between two concentric microtubes is analytically investigated by taking the velocity slip and the temperature jump at the wall into account . the effects of the mixed convection parameter gr / Re , the knudsen number kn , and the aspect ratio r* on the microchannel hydrodynamic and thermal behaviors are determined . finally , a nu = f(Gr / Re,Kn , r* ) expression is developed . it is disclosed that increasing gr / Re enhances heat transfer while rarefaction effects considered by the velocity slip and the temperature jump in the slip flow regime decreases it . 
poly(dimethylsiloxane) ( PDMS ) is a widely used substrate for microfluidic devices , as it enables facile fabrication and has other distinctive properties . however , for applications requiring highly sensitive nanoelectrospray ionization mass spectrometry ( nanoESI-MS ) detection , the use of PDMS microdevices has been hindered by a large chemical background in the mass spectra that originates from the leaching of uncross - linked oligomers and other contaminants from the substrate . A more general challenge is that microfluidic devices containing monolithically integrated electrospray emitters are frequently unable to operate stably in the nanoflow regime where the best sensitivity is achieved . In this report , we extracted the contaminants from PDMS substrates using a series of solvents , eliminating the background observed when untreated PDMS microchips are used for nanoESI-MS , such that peptides at concentrations of <nUm> nM were readily detected . optimization of the integrated emitter geometry enabled stable operation at flow rates as low as <nUm> nL min-1 . 
this article investigates the formation of albumin droplets in fatty esters by means of a flow focussing geometry where the continuous oil phase is introduced in the two lateral branches of a Y junction . the effect of the geometry is investigated in order to clarify the scales controlling the droplet generation with this type of fluid couple . the transition from regular droplet flow to stratified flow is identified from the experiments . it is found that the droplet size varies linearly with the flow rate ratio between the disperse and continuous phases . this is similar to what is found in T junctions microfluidic systems for low capillary numbers . 
we present a microfluidic cross-flowing system for producing biphasic emulsion droplets and non-spherical polymer microparticles . microfluidic channels on a glass chip comprise a y-shaped channel so as to form a twophase organic stream of photocurable and non-curable phases , and a t-junction to generate phase - separated droplets in a cross-flowing aqueous stream . the biphasic droplets at equilibrium formed a janus configuration ( partial engulfing ) or a core - shell configuration ( complete engulfing ) consistent with minimizing the interfacial free energies among the three liquid phases , according to the three spreading coefficients . when silicone oil was used as the non-curable phase , monodisperse janus droplets were generated reproducibly in a one - step process ; for e.g. , the mean particle size was <nUm> lm with a coefficient of variation ( CV ) of <nUm> % . subsequent UV - initiated polymerization yielded monodisperse particles with controlled convex / concave structures , which were tunable through variation of the ratio of the flow rates between the two organic phases . In contrast , when perfluorocarbon fluid , which is more hydrophobic than silicone oil , was used as the non-curable phase , monodisperse core - shell droplets were generated in a two - step regime , leading to the synthesis of cross-linked polymeric shells with a pore on their surfaces . we also investigated how the asymmetric flow configuration influenced droplet formation at the t-junction . 
harnessing hydrazoic acid in a microreactor ! tetrazoles have been synthesized in a very efficient manner by using a high - temperature / high - pressure process intensification regime . despite the toxic and explosive nature of hydrazoic acid , the synthesis was conducted safely in continuous flow format with residence times as short as <nUm> minutes at 260# ° C ( see picture ) . 
we show that nanoscale surface roughness , which commonly occurs on microfabricated metal electrodes , can significantly suppress electro-osmotic flows when excess surface conductivity is appreciable . we demonstrate the physical mechanism for electro-osmotic flow suppression due to surface curvature , compute the effects of varying surface conductivity and roughness amplitudes on the slip velocities of a model system , and identify scalings for flow suppression in different regimes of surface conduction . we suggest that roughness may be one factor that contributes to large discrepancies observed between classical electrokinetic theory and modern microfluidic experiments . 
living systems employ cilia to control and to sense the flow of fluids for many purposes , such as pumping , locomotion , feeding , and tissue morphogenesis . beyond their use in biology , functional arrays of artificial cilia have been envisaged as a potential biomimetic strategy for inducing fluid flow and mixing in lab - on - a - chip devices . here we report on fluid transport produced by magnetically actuated arrays of biomimetic cilia whose size approaches that of their biological counterparts , a scale at which advection and diffusion compete to determine mass transport . our biomimetic cilia recreate the beat shape of embryonic nodal cilia , simultaneously generating two sharply segregated regimes of fluid flow : above the cilia tips their motion causes directed , long - range fluid transport , whereas below the tips we show that the cilia beat generates an enhanced diffusivity capable of producing increased mixing rates . these two distinct types of flow occur simultaneously and are separated in space by less than <nUm> mm , approximately <nUm> % of the biomimetic cilium length . while this suggests that our system may have applications as a versatile microfluidics device , we also focus on the biological implications of our findings . our statistical analysis of particle transport identifying an enhanced diffusion regime provides novel evidence for the existence of mixing in ciliated systems , and we demonstrate that the directed transport regime is poiseuille - couette flow , the first analytical model consistent with biological measurements of fluid flow in the embryonic node . 
there are common problems with adsorption of analytes on the surfaces of microfluidic systems with physiological samples such as blood serum , plasma , and urine . the authors ' investigation involves the interaction of serum components with fused - silica surfaces under various flow regimes in microcapillaries . their focus will include the individual components of serum as well as fresh whole serum . the authors studied the whole serum components in our microfluidic system to uncover the responses of proteins in capillary and microchannel surfaces when influenced by the highly variable serum constituents . they have observed the whole serum with a total protein assay by using the bicinchoninic acid assay in combination with a characterization method , such as SDS polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis , and repeated observations for any change of flow rate in fused - silica capillaries ( <nUm> mm inside diameter ) under continuous flow . the authors ' preliminary results contradict anecdotal evidence that proteins and other components of serum clog or prevent flow at steady low flow rates . 
liquid - liquid flows in microchannels are important to microreactors / microfluidic devices that are used to carry out liquid - liquid reactions , extractions , emulsifications , etc . In this work , we report numerical investigations of drop / slug formation and flow regimes for liquid - liquid ( oil - water ) flow in microchannels . the volume of fluid ( VOF ) method was used to simulate the dynamics of water drop / slug formation in silicon oil , and the predicted drop / slug shapes / lengths were compared with previous literature measurements [ garstecki et al. , lab chip <nUm> , <nUm> , 437-446 ] . the effects of flow rates of water and oil phases ( <nUm> - <nUm> and <nUm> - <nUm> mL / s , respectively ) , channel size , liquid - liquid distributor ( t-junction and y-junction ) , and liquid viscosity on liquid - liquid flow regimes and slug lengths were investigated . the predicted drop / slug formation dynamics / slug lengths agreed satisfactorily with the aforementioned garstecki et al. literature measurements for qwater / qoil in the range of <nUm> - <nUm> . however , for qwate r / qoil > <nUm> , unlike the ( long ) slug flow reported in the aforementioned garstecki et al. literature , a parallel flow was observed in the numerical simulations . the effect of wall adhesion ( contact angle ) on the flow regimes and slug lengths was also investigated . the experimentally validated computational model will be useful to simulate mixing , transport processes , and chemical reactions in microchannels . 
the surface of a microbearing in a microelectromechanical system ( MEMS ) or microfluidic device is described by a random roughness model characterised by fractal geometry . A modified reynolds equation with velocity slip on the rough wall is used to describe the ultra-thin lubrication of the microbearing at a wide range of knudsen number covering the slip and transition regimes . the effects of knudsen number , bearing geometry parameters and roughness parameters on the flow behaviours , including pressure distribution , load carrying capacity , streamwise location of the load carrying capacity and shear stress , are all investigated and discussed . the results show that surface roughness influences not only pressure distribution and load carrying capacity but also shear stress distribution of the rarefied gas flow in microbearings . the flow over surfaces with higher relative roughness induces pressure fluctuation . it indicates that the effect of random surface roughness is of great significance in the analysis and design of gas - lubricated microbearings and should be comprehensively taken into account for MEMS and microfluidic devices . 
high quality factor of dynamic structures at micro and nano scale is exploited in various applications of micro electro-mechanical systems ( MEMS ) and nano electro-mechanical system . the quality factor of such devices can be very high in vacuum . however , when vacuum is not desirable or not possible , the tiny structures must vibrate in air or some other gas at pressure levels that may vary from atmospheric to low vacuum . the interaction of the surrounding fluid with the vibrating structure leads to dissipation , thus bringing down the quality factor . depending on the ambient fluid pressure or the gap between the vibrating and the fixed structure , the fluid motion can range from continuum flow to molecular flow giving a wide range of dissipation . the relevant fluid flow characteristics are determined by the knudsen number which is the ratio of the mean free path of the gas molecule to the characteristic flow length of the device . this number is very small for continuum flow and reasonably big for molecular flow . In this paper , we study the effect of fluid pressure on the quality factor by carrying out experiments on a MEMS device that consists of a double gimbaled torsional resonator . such devices are commonly used in optical cross-connects and switches . we only vary fluid pressure to make the knudsen number go through the entire range of continuum flow , slip flow , transition flow , and molecular flow . we experimentally determine the quality factor of the torsional resonator at different air pressures ranging from <nUm> Torr to <nUm> Torr . the variation of this pressure over six orders of magnitude ensures required rarefaction to range over all flow conditions . finally , we get the variation of quality factor with pressure . the result indicates that the quality factor , q , follows a power law , q ∝ p-r , with different values of the exponent r in different flow regimes . In the second part of the paper , we propose the use of effective viscosity for considering velocity slip conditions in solving navier - stokes equation numerically . this concept is validated with analytical results for a simple case and then compared with the experimental results presented in this paper . the study shows that the effective viscosity concept can be used effectively even for the molecular regime if the air - gap to length ratio is sufficiently small ( h0 / L < <nUm> ) . As this ratio increases , the range of validity decreases . 
In a previous article , we studied the basics of emulsification in microfluidic y-junctions , however , without considering the effect of viscosity of the disperse phase . As it is known from investigations on many different microstructures that viscosity and viscosity ratio are governing parameters for droplet size , we here investigate whether this is also the case for microfluidic y-junctions and do so for a wide range of process conditions . the investigated y-junctions have a width of <nUm> or <nUm> mm and a depth of <nUm> mm , and the formed monodisperse droplets ( CV < <nUm> % ) are between <nUm> and <nUm> mm . we varied the disperse - phase viscosity using different oils ( 1-105 mPa s ) , and continuous - phase viscosity using glycerol - water and ethanol - water mixtures ( <nUm> - <nUm> mPa s ) , which corresponds to disperse - to - continuous - phase viscosity ratios from <nUm> to <nUm> . through the variation of the liquids , also a range in interfacial tensions ( 12-55 mN m-1 ) is assessed . the disperse - phase flow rate is varied from <nUm> to <nUm> mL h-1 , the continuous - phase flow rate from <nUm> mL h-1 to <nUm> mL h-1 , and this corresponds to flow rate ratios from <nUm> × 10-3 to <nUm> , which is once again based on wide range of conditions . for all these conditions , in which droplets are formed in the dripping and jetting regime , the droplet size could be described with a model based on the existing force - balance model , but now extended to incorporate the cross-sectional area of the droplet and the resistance with the wall . surprisingly enough , it was found that the droplet size is not influenced by the disperse - phase viscosity , or the viscosity ratio , but it is dominated by the resistance with the wall and the continuous - phase properties . because of this , emulsification with y-junctions is intrinsically simpler than any other shear - based method as droplet size is only determined by the continuous phase . 
this paper documents the scalar imaging of an electrokinetic flow instability that is directly relevant to microfluidic systems that aim to handle and analyze heterogeneous sample streams . the instability occurs in simple t-junctions where two streams of different ionic concentration flow into a common channel . using neutral dye visualizations , general qualitative behavior of the instability is documented including the formation of a wave in the stream / stream material line that originates at the junction of the two channels and propagates downstream . several quantitative properties of this phenomenon are measured including wave speed and the extent of the perturbation boundary . this work is part of an ongoing project to identify the physics of this instability and determine the regime of stability , with an ultimate goal of developing methods to either enhance or suppress the instability . 
with the growing interest and development of microfluidic systems , the need for micro-scale laminar flow mixing techniques is evident . traditional mixing methods often rely upon turbulent flow for mixing which is generally not present on the micro-scale and so alternative approaches must be sought . In this work , we report on the impact of flow pulsatility on the laminar mixing surface / interface formed between two converging microchannel flows . the motivation behind the study is to assess the potential for pulsatility as a possible MEMS - mixing strategy . A 3-D computational model of the converging flow at a <nUm> ° junction is developed using the fluent6 ® CFD software and the volume - of - fluid algorithm is used to track time - dependent behavior of the interface downstream of the junction . results thus far have shown that for certain parametric regimes a complex , evolving interfacial distortion can form which propagates and persists downstream of the junction . time - series for the total interfacial area and the interfacial motion have been extracted from numerical data and spectral analyses have been performed ; some interesting nonlinear behavior has been observed . of particular importance , the results also show that the complexity of the interfacial structure is only significant at higher frequencies ( order of kHz ) which is appropriate for MEMS - based pumping devices . 
cavitation has long been a concern in the engineering of fluid machinery . the state of the art in MEMS is now such that micro-machines are being designed and built which , by conventional macro-world criteria , can operate in cavitating regimes . specifically , cavitation in 900-micron-chord cascades characteristic of micro-centrifugal pumps was investigated through analysis and experiment for working fluids of water and ethanol . the primary finding was that cavitation in these micro-devices exhibited static and dynamic behavior very similar to that expected in large scale flows . furthermore , conventional cavitation models coupled to 2D and 3D CFD simulations matched the micro-scale data well in predicting the onset of cavitation and the length of the cavitation zones . also , no mechanical damage from cavitation was found . this implies that cavitation in micro-machines will offer no unusual surprises to device designers . 
we simulate electrothermally induced flow in polymeric , insulator - based dielectrophoresis ( iDEP ) systems with DC - offset , AC electric fields at finite thermal peclet number , and we identify key regimes where electrothermal ( ET ) effects enhance particle deflection and trapping . we study a single , two - dimensional constriction in channel depth with parametric variations in electric field , channel geometry , fluid conductivity , particle electrophoretic ( EP ) mobility , and channel electroosmotic ( EO ) mobility . we report the effects of increasing particle EP mobility , channel EO mobility , and AC and DC field magnitudes on the mean constriction temperature and particle behavior . specifically , we quantify particle deflection and trapping , referring to the deviation of particles from their pathlines due to dielectrophoresis as they pass a const riction and the stagnation of particles due to negative dielectrophoresis near a constriction , respectively . this work includes the coupling between fluid , heat , and electromagnetic phenomena via temperature - dependent physical parameters . results indicate that the temperature distribution depends strongly on the fluid conductivity and electric field magnitude , and particle deflection and trapping depend strongly on the channel geometry . electrothermal ( ET ) effects perturb the EO flow field , creating vorticity near the channel constriction and enhancing the deflection and trapping effects . ET effects alter particle deflection and trapping responses in insulator - based dielectrophoresis devices , especially at intermediate device aspect ratios ( <nUm> ≤ r ≤ <nUm> ) in solutions of higher conductivity ( sm ≥ <nUm> × 10-3-S / m ) . the impact of ET effects on particle deflection and trapping are diminished when particle EP mobility or channel EO mobility is high . In almost all cases , ET effects enhance negative dielectrophoretic particle deflection and trapping phenomena . 
an experimental study of pulsatile flow in microchannel is reported in this paper . such a study is important because time - varying flows are frequently encountered in microdevices . the hydraulic diameter of the microchannel is <nUm> mm and deionized water is the working fluid . the pressure drop across the microchannel as a function of time is recorded , from which the average and r.m.s. pressure drops are obtained . the experiments have been performed in the quasi-steady flow regime for a wide range of flow rate , frequency of pulsations , and duty cycle . the results suggest that the pressure with pulsations lies between the minimum and maximum steady state pressure values . the average pressure drop with pulsation is approximately linear with respect to the flow rate . the theoretical expression for pressure has also been derived wherever possible and the experimental data is found to lie below the corresponding theoretical values . the difference with respect to the theoretical value increases with an increase in frequency and a decrease in flow rate , with a maximum difference of <nUm> % . this is attributed to the small size of the microchannel . an increase in frequency of square waveform leads to a larger reduction in pressure drop as compared to rectangular waveform , irrespective of the duty cycle . the results can be interpreted with the help of a first - order model proposed here ; the model results are found to compare well against the experimental results . A correlation for friction factor in terms of the other non-dimensional governing parameters is also proposed . experimental study of mass - driven pulsatile flow in microchannel is being conducted for the first time at these scales and the results are of both fundamental and practical importance . 
the reynolds number in nanofluid studies depends on the inlet velocity and the kinematic viscosity of nanofluid . the nanofluid kinematic viscosity increases with an increase in nanoparticles volume fraction while the inlet velocity should be increased to keep the reynolds number constant . therefore , it is not clear that either increasing the nanoparticles volume fraction or increasing the inlet velocity has a major role on heat transfer enhancement in nanofluids flow studies which are done at constant reynolds numbers . In this study , forced convection Al 2O 3-water nanofluid flows in two - dimensional rectangular microchannels have been investigated to study heat transfer enhancement due to addition of the nanoparticles to the base fluid especially in microchannels at low reynolds number . three different cases are examined to evaluate proportion impact of increasing nanoparticles volume fraction ( φ ) and the inlet velocity ( u in ) on heat transfer enhancement . two - dimensional navier - stokes and energy equations accompany with the slip velocity and the jump temperature boundary conditions expressions have been discretized using the finite volume method ( FVM ) . the brownian motions of nanoparticles have been considered to determine the thermal conductivity of nanofluids . the calculated results show good agreement with the previous numerical and analytical data . it is found that at a given reynolds number , the major enhancement in the nusselt number is not due to increasing the nanoparticle concentrations but it is due to the increasing the inlet velocity to reach a constant Re . constant reynolds number studies of nanofluids are not sufficient approach to evaluate the heat transfer and the skin friction factor due to the nanofluids usage . 
jammed systems all have a yield stress . among these materials some have been shown to shear - band but it is as yet unclear why some materials develop shear - band and some others do not . In order to rationalize existing data concerning the flow characteristics of jammed systems and in particular understand the physical origin of such a difference , we propose a simple approach for describing the steady flow behaviour of yield stress fluids , which retains only basic physical ingredients . within this framework we show that in the liquid regime the behaviour of jammed systems turns from that of a simple yield stress fluid ( exhibiting homogeneous flows ) to a shear - banding material when the ratio of a characteristic relaxation time of the system to a restructuring time becomes smaller than <nUm> , thus suggesting a possible physical origin of these trends . 
the laminar flow regime prevailing in pressure - driven flow through a y-shaped microfluidic channel was utilized to create a stable boundary between two aqueous liquids . transverse transport of ions between these two liquids gave rise to a diffusion potential , which was monitored by measurement of the open circuit potential . In this report , the influence on the cross-channel potential distribution of protonation reactions occurring in the boundary zone between the two co-flowing liquids is presented . the proton source was present in one of the co-flowing streams , and an uncharged proton acceptor was present in the other aqueous stream . the time - dependent transport equation for diffusion and migration was augmented by chemical reaction terms and was solved for all species present in both streams as a theoretical basis for the analysis . within this model , the system was assumed to be homogeneous along the channel height , and effects of nonuniform velocity profiles were neglected . A reduction in potential by several millivolts was predicted for a protonation reaction occurring close to the boundary between the two aqueous streams , provided that the mobility of the protonated species was lower than the mobility of the co-cation in the background electrolyte ( alkali metal cation in this case ) . the magnitude of the decrease in the potential was greater for protonated molecules with lower mobility or if the mobility of the background electrolyte cation was increased . experimental results are presented for imidazole and d-histidine as proton acceptors present in <nUm> mM ClK , <nUm> mM ClNa , or <nUm> mM ClCs solution and co-flowing with a stream of <nUm> mM hydrochloric acid , which served as the proton source . decreases in measured potential , in line with the predicted diminished potential , were obtained . 
micro-mixer devices , such as the confined impinging jets reactor ( CIJR ) are currently under study , in particular for precipitation processes of micro- and nano-particles , employed in a variety of applications that include pharmaceuticals , cosmetics , dyes and pesticides . In this work , with the purpose of gaining a better understanding of the main mixing mechanisms occurring in a CIJR , the flow field was studied at four inlet flow rates ranging from Re = <nUm> to Re = <nUm> . these conditions correspond to regimes with incipient turbulence in the chamber . Micro-Particle image velocimetry ( microPIV ) experiments and direct numerical simulations ( DNS ) were performed and compared . MicroPIV is an innovative experimental technique that allows measurement of the instantaneous velocity fields in microfluidic devices . the coupled numerical - experimental approach was found to be essential in understanding and explaining the flow behaviour and the development of turbulence , in particular with respect to the important effects of the inlet boundary conditions . oscillations present in the inlet flow of the device are in fact primarily responsible for the chaotic and turbulent effects in the reactor . these results provide insights that are important in the development of appropriate computational models for this type of micro-reactor or mixers . 
this research describes the design , fabrication and performance of an optofluidic 3D microlens reconfigurable by hydrodynamic flow rate adjustments . the microflow device is realized by standard single - layer micromachining of the photoresist SU-8 on a silicon substrate . on - chip waveguides and microgrooves designed for the insertion of multimode glass fibers are integrated to serve as optical interconnection for incident light coupling and detection . the laminar flow regime in the structured microchannel and the use of two transparent fluids with different refractive indices enable smooth optical interfaces useful for the creation of optofluidic elements . the inertial microfluidic effects occurring in the channels allow the generation of a multiconvex 3D microlens . by altering the input flow rates the lens shape with different lens radii in the lateral and normal direction is adjusted . to confirm the fluid dynamic simulations and to three - dimensionally characterize the microflow system we conducted confocal laser scanning and fluorescent sample measurements . the unique features of this optical chip offer a novel 3D light focusing system attractive for enhanced low - cost cell parameter screening without the use of bulky / expensive single photon counting units . 
due to the very small size of the mouse inner ear , <nUm> nL volume , developing effective , controlled infusion systems is quite challenging . key technologies have been created to minimize both size and power for an implantable pump for murine intracochlear infusions . A method for coupling fine capillary tubing to microfluidic channels is presented which provides low volume , biocompatible interconnects withstanding pressures as high as <nUm> kPa ( <nUm> psi ) and consuming less than <nUm> nL of volume exiting in-plane with the pump . surface micromachined resistive bridges integrated into the flow channel for anemometry based flow rate measurement have been optimized for low power operation in the ultra-low flow rate regime . A process for creation of deformable diaphragms over pump chambers with simultaneous coating of the microfluidic channels has been developed allowing integration of a biocompatible fluid flow path . these advances represent enabling capabilities for a drug delivery system suitable for space constrained applications such as subcutaneous implantation in mice . 
the dynamics and stability of a thin , viscous film of volatile liquid flowing under the influence of gravity over a non-uniformly heated substrate are investigated using lubrication theory . attention is focused on the regime in which evaporation balances the flow due to gravity . the film terminates above the heater at an apparent contact line , with a microscopically thin precursor film adsorbed due to the disjoining pressure . the film develops a weak thermocapillary ridge due to the marangoni stress at the upstream edge of the heated region . As for spreading films , a more significant ridge is formed near the apparent contact line . for weak marangoni effects , the film evolves to a steady profile . for stronger marangoni effects , the film evolves to a time - periodic state . results of a linear stability analysis reveal that the steady film is unstable to transverse perturbations above a critical value of the marangoni parameter , leading to finger formation at the contact line . the streamwise extent of the fingers is limited by evaporation . the time - periodic profiles are always unstable , leading to the formation of periodically - oscillating fingers . for rectangular heaters , the film profiles after instability onset are consistent with images from published experimental studies . 
this paper reports the findings of a numerical investigation on the droplet break-up in a microfluidic t-junction . the numerical flow visualization of the droplet formation process is validated with the experimental flow visualization . from the computational results , we show that the pressure profile of the dispersed phase and the continuous phase in the squeezing regime changes as the droplet break-up process proceeds . the assumption taken by other researchers that the dispersed phase pressure profile , during the droplet formation process at a t-junction , remains constant and only the continuous phase pressure changes according to the blockage of the channel is proved to be invalid . we provide new insights on the pressure difference between the dispersed phase and the continuous phase during the droplet break-up process and show that the minimum pressure difference happens at the last moment of the droplet break-up and not during the second and third stage of the droplet formation mechanism in the squeezing regime as suggested by other researchers . 
flow regimes obtained as a consequence of two immiscible fluids interacting at a t-junction are presented for transitional to high capillary numbers and different ratios of the continuous and dispersed phase flow rates and viscosities . results are presented for the formation of micron - sized droplets using simulations performed based on a three - dimensional lattice boltzmann method . the influence of viscosity and geometry of the device on the frequency and volume of droplets formed has been examined and the nondimensional drop size correlated with the capillary number and flow rate ratio . this work reveals two important and new physical features : ( a ) the transition zone separating droplet and jet flows narrows for high capillary numbers and ( b ) the critical flow rate ratio separating droplet and parallel flows increases as the dispersed to continuous channel width ratio increases , aspects which have been correlated using a simple relation for both transitions from the droplet-at-T-junction to droplet - in - channel and droplet - in - channel to parallel flow . In the droplet-at-T-junction regime , the droplet formation frequency was recorded as a function of the capillary number , flow rate ratio , and the channel width ratio as well . results show that the transition to stable jets can be delayed and droplets can be formed even at very high flow rate ratios by significantly increasing the viscosity of the continuous phase . 
the time evolution of a passive scalar advected by parallel shear flows is studied for a class of rapidly varying initial data . such situations are of practical importance in a wide range of applications from microfluidics to geophysics . In these contexts , it is well - known that the long - time evolution of the tracer concentration is governed by taylor 's asymptotic theory of dispersion . In contrast , we focus here on the evolution of the tracer at intermediate time scales . we show how intermediate regimes can be identified before taylor 's , and in particular , how the taylor regime can be delayed indefinitely by properly manufactured initial data . A complete characterization of the sorting of these time scales and their associated spatial structures is presented . these analytical predictions are compared with highly resolved numerical simulations . specifically , this comparison is carried out for the case of periodic variations in the streamwise direction on the short scale with envelope modulations on the long scales , and show how this structure can lead to " anomalously " diffusive transients in the evolution of the scalar onto the ultimate regime governed by taylor dispersion . mathematically , the occurrence of these transients can be viewed as a competition in the asymptotic dominance between large peclet ( pe ) numbers and the long / short scale aspect ratios ( LVel / LTracer ≡ k ) , two independent nondimensional parameters of the problem . we provide analytical predictions of the associated time scales by a modal analysis of the eigenvalue problem arising in the separation of variables of the governing advection - diffusion equation . the anomalous time scale in the asymptotic limit of large k pe is derived for the short scale periodic structure of the scalar 's initial data , for both exactly solvable cases and in general with WKBJ analysis . In particular , the exactly solvable sawtooth flow is especially important in that it provides a short cut to the exact solution to the eigenvalue problem for the physically relevant vanishing neumann boundary conditions in linear - shear channel flow . we show that the life of the corresponding modes at large pe for this case is shorter than the ones arising from shear free zones in the fluid 's interior . A WKBJ study of the latter modes provides a longer intermediate time evolution . this part of the analysis is technical , as the corresponding spectrum is dominated by asymptotically coalescing turning points in the limit of large pe numbers . when large scale initial data components are present , the transient regime of the WKBJ ( anomalous ) modes evolves into one governed by taylor dispersion . this is studied by a regular perturbation expansion of the spectrum in the small wavenumber regimes . 
immiscible kerosene - water two - phase flows in microchannels connected by a t-junction were numerically studied by a lattice boltzmann ( LB ) method based on field mediators . the two - phase flow lattice boltzmann model was first validated and improved by several test cases of a still droplet . the five distinct flow regimes of the kerosene - water system , previously identified in the experiments from zhao et al. , were reproduced . the quantitative and qualitative agreement between the simulations and the experimental data show the effectiveness of the numerical method . the roles of the interfacial tension and contact angle on the flow patterns and shapes of droplets were discussed and highlighted according to the numerical results based on the improved two - phase LB model . this work demonstrated that the developed LBM simulator is a viable tool to study immiscible two - phase flows in microchannels , and such a tool could provide tangible guidance for the design of various microfluidic devices that involve immiscible multi-phase flows . 
the prospects of performing DNA hybridisation assays in a novel sequential scheme are explored in this article . it is based on recording the kinetics of hybridisation on a microfluidic device measuring only <nUm> by <nUm> mm . it contains a split channel system for fast mixing and a subsequent meandering channel to observe the evolution of the mixture by optical means . the problems of diffusion limitations in the laminar flow regime are overcome by reducing the average diffusion distance to a few micrometers only . DNA oligomers ( 20-mers ) of different sequences were injected on the chip for mixing . the detection of hybridisation was based on the fluorescence of DNA - intercalating dyes . two modes of operation were investigated . first , the samples were injected into the micromixing device at a high flow rate of <nUm> ml min <nUm> . when the sample passed through the actual micromixing unit , the flow rate was reduced to allow for measurement of fluorescence levels at various steady - state reaction times in the range of 2-15 s , as defined by the channel geometry . using this continuous flow approach , photobleaching of fluorophores could be avoided . In a buffer containing <nUm> m ClNa , <nUm> basepair mismatches could routinely be detected within 5-20 s . single base - pair mismatches were successfully identified under low salt conditions . In the second mode , the flow was completely stopped and the evolution of the total fluorescence signal influenced by the hybridisation of oligomers and photobleaching was observed . whereas the sequence - dependent effects remained unchanged , the assay times between the mixing of two oligomers and clear identification of their hybridisation properties could be reduced down to a maximum of 5-7 s , in some cases even below <nUm> s . 
we investigate the role of interfacial slip on evaporation of a thin liquid film in a microfluidic channel . the effective slip mechanism is attributed to the formation of a depleted layer adhering to the substrate - fluid interface , either in a continuum or in a rarefied gas regime , as a consequence of intricate hydrophobic interactions in the narrow confinement . we appeal to the fundamental principles of conservation in relating the evaporation mechanisms with fluid flow and heat transfer over interfacial scales . we obtain semi-analytical solutions of the pertinent governing equations , with coupled heat and mass transfer boundary conditions at the liquid - vapor interface . we observe that a general consequence of interfacial slip is to elongate the liquid film , thereby leading to a film thickening effect . thicker liquid films , in turn , result in lower heat transfer rates from the wall to liquid film , and consequently lower mass transfer rates from the liquid film to the vapor phase . nevertheless , the total mass of evaporation ( or equivalently , the net heat transfer ) turns out to be higher in case of interfacial slip due to the longer film length . we also develop significant physical insights on the implications of the relative thickness of the depleted layer with reference to characteristic length scales of the microfluidic channel on the evaporation process , under combined influences of the capillary pressure , disjoining pressure , and the driving temperature differential for the interfacial transport . 
progress in microelectronics , sensors and optics is strongly dependent on the miniaturization of components , and the integration of nanoscale structures into applicable systems . In this regard , conventional top - down technologies such as lithography have limits concerning the dimensions and the choice of material . therefore , several bottom-up approaches have been investigated to satisfy the need for structures with large aspect ratios in the nanometre regime . for further implementation , however , it is crucial to find methods to define position , orientation and length of the nanowires . In this study , we present a microchip to trap in situ formed bundles of nanowires in microsized cages and clamps , thereby enabling immobilisation , positioning and cutting - out of desired lengths . the microchip consists of two layers , one of which enables the formation of metal - organic nanowires at the interface of two co-flowing laminar streams . the other layer , separated by a thin and deflectable PDMS membrane , serves as the pneumatic control layer to impress microsized features ( " donuts " ) onto the nanowires . In this way , a piece of the nanowire bundle with a prescribed length is immobilised inside the donut . furthermore , partly open ring - shaped structures enabled trapping of hybrid wires and subsequent functionalisation with fluorescent beads . we believe that the method is a versatile approach to form and modify nanoscale structures via microscale tools , thereby enabling the construction of fully functional nanowire - based systems . 
we have performed experiments to characterize the diffusion of an aqueous ferrofluid in water submitted to a magnetic field . experiments were carried out in a microfluidic device to take advantage of the low reynolds number flow conditions at the microscale . we have measured the concentration profile across the microchannel , which defines a characteristic length of the diffusion zone . this characteristic length varies as the square - root of the distance from the entrance of the channel divided by the mean velocity , which evidences a diffusive regime . however the application of a magnetic field is shown to inhibit the diffusion , with an increasing efficiency as the field intensity increases . we propose an explanation of this effect based on the anisotropy of the diffusion coefficient due to the magnetic field . this hypothesis is corroborated by numerical simulations . 
In a focal injury model , platelets adhere and activate under flow on a collagen - coated surface , creating a field of individual platelet aggregates . these aggregates exhibit distinct structural characteristics that are linked to the local flow conditions . by combining image analysis techniques and epifluorescence microscopy , we developed a robust strategy for quantifying the characteristic instantaneous width and length of a growing platelet deposit . we have confirmed the technique using model images consisting of ellipsoid objects and quantified the shear rate - dependent nature of aggregate morphology . venous wall shear rate conditions ( <nUm> s-1 ) generated small , circular platelet deposits , whereas elevated arterial shear rates ( <nUm> and <nUm> s <nUm> ) generated platelet masses elongated twofold in the direction of flow . At <nUm> s-1 , an important regime for von willebrand factor (vWF)-mediated recruitment , we observed sporadic platelet capture events on collagen that led to rapidly growing deposits . furthermore , inter-donor differences were investigated with respect to aggregate growth rate . after perfusion at elevated shear rates ( <nUm> s-1 ) for <nUm> min , we identified a twofold increase in aggregate size ( <nUm> ± <nUm> mm ; p < <nUm> ) and a threefold increase in growth rate parallel to the flow ( <nUm> ± <nUm> mm / s ; p < <nUm> ) for an individual donor . suspecting a role for vWF , we found that this donor had a twofold increase in soluble vWF relative to the other donors and pooled plasma . microfluidic devices in combination with automated morphology analysis offer new tools for characterizing clot development under flow . 
we investigated the collective motion of a one - dimensional array of water - in - oil droplets flowing in microfluidic channel in quasi-2D at low reynolds number . driven far from equilibrium by the symmetry - breaking flow field , the droplets exhibit acoustic normal modes ( crystal ' phonons ' ) with unusual dispersion relations . these phonons are due to long - range hydrodynamic dipolar interactions between the droplets . the phonon spectra change anomalously at the crossover between unconfined 2D flow and ID confined flow , as a result from an interplay between boundary - induced screening and crystal incompressibility . microfluidic crystals offer a vista , in the linear flow regime , into soft - matter systems far from equilibrium . 
using the lattice boltzmann multiphase model , numerical simulations have been performed to understand the dynamics of droplet formation in a microfluidic cross-junction . the influence of capillary number , flow rate ratio , viscosity ratio , and viscosity of the continuous phase on droplet formation has been systematically studied over a wide range of capillary numbers . two different regimes , namely the squeezinglike regime and the dripping regime , are clearly identified with the transition occurring at a critical capillary number Ca cr . generally , large flow rate ratio is expected to produce big droplets , while increasing capillary number will reduce droplet size . In the squeezing - like regime ( Ca ≤ cacr ) , droplet breakup process is dominated by the squeezing pressure and the viscous force ; while in the dripping regime ( Ca > cacr ) , the viscous force is dominant and the droplet size becomes independent of the flow rate ratio as the capillary number increases . In addition , the droplet size weakly depends on the viscosity ratio in both regimes and decreases when the viscosity of the continuous phase increases . finally , a scaling law is established to predict the droplet size . 
two phase systems are ubiquitous in processes and products , and in both cases performance is maximized when precise control over the individual phases , and the ensemble , is possible . microfluidic technologies afford higher levels of control over two - phase systems than is possible in macroscopic process equipment , opening avenues to controlled reactions as well as products having tightly controlled properties including emulsion size distribution . A review of recent progress in two - phase flows in microfluidic devices is presented . the fundamentals of two - phase flows including some important dimensionless numbers are firstly introduced , followed by a review of two - phase flow regimes in gas - liquid and liquid - liquid systems , focusing on microfluidic methods for controlling droplet formation and coalescence . applications of two - phase microfluidic flows are briefly reviewed , including new approaches to the formation of well - defined complex emulsion which , like a matryoshka doll , have structure within structure . the large number of recent publications reviewed in this paper highlights the tremendous interest in the fundamental study and use of controlled microfluidic two - phase flows , driven by the promise of highly controlled processes and new products having controlled complexity . 
A microfluidic system , fully operational for further studies of foraging abilities of marine microorganisms , is presented . the microchannels are fabricated in PDMS ( polydimethylsiloxane ) by a simple , fast and low - cost soft lithography method , utilizing a SU-8 photoresist master . the devices exhibit a quite satisfactory performance , since we obtain the expected laminar flow regime . No leakage was observed in the channel itself and the appropriate flow control was attained . this allows to reproduce , in controlled and realistic conditions , resource patches existing in the ocean at submillimetric scales . 
In this contribution we present a new disposable micro-fluidic biosensor array for the online analysis of adherent madin darby canine kidney ( MDCK-II ) cells on quartz crystal resonators ( QCRs ) . the device was conceived for the parallel cultivation of cells providing the same experimental conditions among all the sensors of the array . As well , dedicated sensor interface electronics were developed and optimized for fast spectra acquisition of all <nUm> QCRs with a miniaturized impedance analyzer . this allowed performing cell cultivation experiments for the observation of fast cellular reaction kinetics with focus on the comparison of the resulting sensor signals influenced by different cell distributions on the sensor surface . to prove the assumption of equal flow circulation within the symmetric micro-channel network and support the hypothesis of identical cultivation conditions for the cells living above the sensors , the influence of fabrication tolerances on the flow regime has been simulated . As well , the shear stress on the adherent cell layer due to the flowing media was characterized . injection molding technology was chosen for the cheap mass production of disposable devices . furthermore , the injection molding process was simulated in order to optimize the mold geometry and minimize the shrinkage and the warpage of the parts . MDCK-II cells were cultivated in the biosensor array . parallel cultivation of cells on the gold surface of the QCRs led to first observations of the impact of the cell distribution on the sensor signals during cell cultivation . indeed , the initial cell distribution revealed a significant influence on the changes in the measured acoustic load on the QCRs suggesting dissimilar cell migrations as well as proliferation kinetics of a non-confluent MDCK-II cell layer . 
this paper reports the investigation on the process of thermally mediated droplet formation at a microfluidic t-junction . the temperature field generated by an integrated heater causes changes in properties of the fluids and affects the droplet formation process . the droplet formation process is formulated in this paper as an incompressible immiscible two - phase flow problem . the motion of the two - phases is strongly coupled by interfacial conditions , which are governed by the three - dimensional navier - stokes and the energy equations . the interface or the droplet surface is described by a narrow - band particle level - set method . the numerical solutions of the problem are obtained with finite volume method on a staggered mesh and validated with the experiment data on droplet formation in the dripping regime of a t-junction . the combined effect of the temperature - dependent viscosities and interfacial tension of the fluids results in a larger droplet at elevated temperature . the effectiveness of the penetration of temperature field induced by different heater geometries that resulted in different incremental change in droplet size over a temperature range is discussed . 
performing localized chemical events on surfaces is critical for numerous applications . we earlier invented the microfluidic probe ( MFP ) , which circumvented the need to process samples in closed microchannels by hydrodynamically confining liquids that performed chemistries on surfaces ( juncker et al. nat. mater.2005 , <nUm> , 622-628 ) . here we present a new and versatile probe , the vertical MFP ( vMFP ) , which operates in the scanning mode while overcoming earlier challenges that limited the practical implementation of the MFP technology . the key component of the vMFP is the head , a microfluidic device ( ∼ <nUm> cm2 in area ) consisting of glass and Si and having microfluidic features fabricated in-plane in the Si layer . the base configuration of the head has two micrometer - size channels that inject / aspirate liquids and terminate at the apex which is ∼ <nUm> mm2 . In scanning mode , the head is oriented vertically with the apex parallel to the surface with typical spacing of 1-30 mm . such length scales and using flow rates from nanoliters / second to microliters / second allow chemical events to be performed on surfaces with tens of picoliter quantities of reagents . before scanning , the head is clipped on a holder for leak - free , low dead volume interface assembly , providing a simple world - to - chip interface . surfaces are scanned by mounting the holder on a computer - controlled stage having ∼ <nUm> mm resolution in positioning . we present detailed steps to fabricate vMFP heads having channels with dimensions from <nUm> mm × <nUm> mm to <nUm> mm × <nUm> mm for liquid localization over areas of 10-10000 mm2 . additionally , advanced design strategies are described to achieve high yield in fabrication and to support a broad range of applications . these include particulate filters , redundant aperture architectures , inclined flow - paths that service apertures , and multiple channels to enable symmetric flow confinement . we also present a method to characterize flow confinement and estimate the distance between the head and the surface by monitoring the evolution of a solution of fluorescently labeled antibody on an activated glass surface . this flow characterization reveals regimes of operation suitable for different surface topographies . we further integrate the dispensing of immersion liquid to the vMFP head for processing surfaces for extended periods of time ( ∼ <nUm> min ) . the versatility of the vMFP is exemplified by patterning fluorescently labeled proteins , inactivation of cells using sodium hypochlorite , and staining living NIH fibroblasts with cellomics . these applications are enabled by the compact design of the head , which provides easy access to the surface , simplifies alignment , and enables processing surfaces having dimensions from the micrometer to the centimeter scale and with large topographical variations . we therefore believe that ease - of - operation , reconfigurability , and conservative use of chemicals by the vMFP will lead to its widespread use by microtechnologists and the chemical and biomedical communities . 
the electrokinetic behavior of nanofluidic devices is dominated by the electrical double layers at the device walls . therefore , accurate , predictive models of double layers are essential for device design and optimization . In this paper , we demonstrate that density functional theory ( DFT ) of electrolytes is an accurate and computationally efficient method for computing finite ion size effects and the resulting ion - ion correlations that are neglected in classical double layer theories such as poisson - boltzmann . because DFT is derived from liquid - theory thermodynamic principles , it is ideal for nanofluidic systems with small spatial dimensions , high surface charge densities , high ion concentrations , and / or large ions . ion - ion correlations are expected to be important in these regimes , leading to nonlinear phenomena such as charge inversion , wherein more counterions adsorb at the wall than is necessary to neutralize its surface charge , leading to a second layer of co-ions . we show that DFT , unlike other theories that do not include ion - ion correlations , can predict charge inversion and other nonlinear phenomena that lead to qualitatively different current densities and ion velocities for both pressure - driven and electro-osmotic flows . we therefore propose that DFT can be a valuable modeling and design tool for nanofluidic devices as they become smaller and more highly charged . 
the formation of dispersed small bubbles in microfluidic flow - focusing devices was investigated experimentally by means of using a high speed camera . the dimensions of the experimental square microchannels are <nUm> mm × <nUm> mm and <nUm> mm × <nUm> mm , respectively . N was used as the gas phase , and water - glycerol mixtures ( <nUm> % ( wt ) , <nUm> % ( wt ) and <nUm> % ( wt ) ) with different concentrations ( <nUm> ~ <nUm> % ( wt ) ) of surfactant SDS ( sodium dodecyl sulfate ) were used as liquid phase . the parameters , such as liquid flow rate , the viscosity and the surface tension of the liquid phase , which influence the size of formed small bubbles , were studied . it was found that the bubble size in bubbly regime decreases with the increase of the flow rate and the viscosity of the liquid phase , while it increases with the increase of the surface tension of the liquid phase . the bubble formation mechanism was discussed , and it was conclude that the small bubbles are formed due to the viscosity force and interfacial forces . A new power law model was proposed to describe the relationship between the size of formed bubbles and the local capillary number . 
the non-linear dynamics of a semi-dilute ( c / c* = <nUm> ) polydisperse polyethylene oxide ( PEO ) solution in microfluidics are studied experimentally using benchmark contraction - expansion flow geometries with three contraction - expansion ratios ( <nUm> : <nUm> : <nUm> , <nUm> : <nUm> : <nUm> and <nUm> : <nUm> : <nUm> ) and two narrow channel lengths ( lc / dh = <nUm> and <nUm> . <nUm> , where lc is the length of the narrow channel and dh is its hydraulic diameter ) . complex flows over a range of elasticity numbers ( el ) , weissenberg numbers ( wi ) and reynolds numbers ( Re ) are characterized using micro-particle image velocimetry ( m-PIV ) and pressure drop measurements . the evolution of vortex formation and dynamics has been visualized through a step-flow-rate experiment . various flow dynamics regimes have been quantified and are presented in a Wi-Re diagram . the experimental results reveal that the contraction ratio can result in qualitatively different vortex dynamics of semi-dilute polymer solutions in microfluidics , whereas the length of the narrow channel merely affects the dynamics at a quantitative level . A single elasticity number , if defined by the size of the narrow channel , is not sufficient to account for the effects of contraction ratio on the non-linear vortex dynamics . 
the complex flow behaviour of semi-dilute ( <nUm> < c / c < <nUm> ) polydisperse polyethylene oxide ( PEO ) aqueous solutions flowing through a planar microfluidic geometry with an <nUm> : <nUm> : <nUm> contraction - expansion is systematically studied . the molecular weight and distribution of the PEO samples are analysed by gel permeation chromatography ( GPC ) . full rheometric characterizations using various techniques including piezoelectric axial vibrator ( PAV ) measurements at frequencies as high as <nUm> Hz are carried out for one semi-dilute PEO solution . complex flows over a wide range of elasticity numbers ( <nUm> ≤ el ≤ <nUm> ) , weissenberg numbers ( <nUm> ≤ wi ≤ <nUm> ) and reynolds numbers ( <nUm> ≤ Re ≤ <nUm> ) are characterized using micro-particle image velocimetry ( m-PIV ) and pressure drop measurements . the evolution of vortex formation and dynamics has been visualized through a step-flow-rate experiment . the effect of el on vortex stability has been studied . various flow dynamics regimes have been quantified and are presented in a Wi-Re diagram . the experimental results reveal that the elastic behaviour of polymer solutions is very sensitive to high molecular weight polymer in the polydisperse polymer samples , and the contraction ratio and the aspect ratio of flow geometry are the important design parameters in controlling the non-linear dynamics of semi-dilute polymer solutions in microfluidics . 
A specially designed micro-mixer made of silicon , calcium fluoride , and silicone with an optical transmission path of <nUm> mm has been used for mid-IR spectroscopy monitoring of mixing - induced chemical reactions in the low millisecond time regime . the basic principle of the proposed continuous - flow technique is to mix two liquids introduced in two times two alternatingly stacked layers through diffusion at the entrance of a <nUm> mm wide , <nUm> cm long micro-fluidic channel also serving as measurement area . by using this special , dedicated arrangement , diffusion lengths and hence the mixing times can be significantly shortened and the overall performance improved in comparison to previous systems and alternative methods . measurements were carried out in transmission mode using an fourier transform infrared ( FTIR ) microscope , recording spectra with spot sizes of <nUm> × <nUm> mm2 each at defined spots along this channel . each of these spots corresponds to a specific reaction time : moving the measurement spot towards the entry yields shorter reaction times , moving it towards the channel 's end gives longer reaction times . this principle is generic in nature and provides a solution for accurate , chemically induced triggering of reactions requiring the mixing of two liquid reagents or reagent solutions . A typical experiment thus yields up to <nUm> time - coded data points , covering a time span from <nUm> to <nUm> ms at a total reagent consumption of only about <nUm> mL . using the fast neutralization reaction of acetic acid with sodium hydroxide as a model , the time required for <nUm> % mixing was determined to be around <nUm> ms . additionally , first experiments on ubiquitin changing its secondary structure from native to " a-state " were carried out , illustrating the potential for time - resolved measurements of proteins in aqueous solutions . 
A new regime of operation of PDMS - based flow - focusing microfluidic devices is presented . we show that monodisperse microbubbles with diameters below one - tenth of the channel width ( here w = <nUm> mm ) can be produced in low viscosity liquids thanks to a strong pressure gradient in the entrance region of the channel . In this new regime bubbles are generated at the tip of a long and stable gas ligament whose diameter , which can be varied by tuning appropriately the gas and liquid flow rates , is substantially smaller than the channel width . through this procedure the volume of the bubbles formed at the tip of the gas ligament can be varied by more than two orders of magnitude . the experimental results for the bubble diameter db as function of the control parameters are accounted for by a scaling theory , which predicts db / w ∝ ( mg / m)1 / <nUm> ( qg / Q)5 / <nUm> , where mg and μ indicate , respectively , the gas and liquid viscosities and qg and q are the gas and liquid flow rates . As a particularly important application of our results we produce monodisperse bubbles with the appropriate diameter for therapeutic applications ( d b ≃ <nUm> mm ) and a production rate exceeding <nUm> Hz . 
In this study , we present a microfluidic oscillator design that employs an impinging jet on a concave surface to enhance the microscale mixing process . the coanda effect along with the gortler instability proves to incite sustainable flapping motion beyond the obstacle and mixing is profoundly improved . from the flow visualization results , four different regimes are identified and we find that the primary enhancement of mixing performance is always linked to the transition of flow regime . moreover , incorporating a sudden - expansion confluence provokes flow three dimensionality and elevates the mixing level significantly at low reynolds numbers . for a reynolds number as low as <nUm> , the tail flow behind the concave obstacle successfully exhibits a periodic oscillation and hopf bifurcation is induced , leading to a drastic augmentation in the time - average mixing efficiency . by utilizing the spectrum analysis , the characteristic frequency of flapping motion is found to vary linearly with the throat velocity , resulting in a constant strouhal number of <nUm> × 10-5 . 
In this paper , a numerical tool is provided in order to study the stability of a confined coflowing jet in a cylindrical geometry . for a given configuration in which the flow rates , viscosities , diameter of the channel , and surface tension are the adjustable parameters , the length on which a jet is stable is computed . At low reynolds number in a cylindrical geometry , two main configurations have been observed by guillot et al. ( 2008 ) [19] on immiscible flows evolving in microchannels : the jet regime and the creation of droplets . the RayleighPlateau instability is responsible for the break-up of a jet . to calculate the critical length , determined by the experimental settings , on which a jet can be stable , the linearization of a system of partial differential equations around the stationary solution describing the jet is performed . the growth rate of the perturbation is computed . the results are compared with experimental data , and a parametric study is supplied . 
we report a contraction - expansion array ( CEA ) microchannel that allows inertial size separation by a force balance between inertial lift and dean drag forces in fluid regimes in which inertial fluid effects become significant . an abrupt change of the cross-sectional area of the channel curves fluid streams and produces a similar effect compared to dean flows in a curved microchannel of constant cross-section , thereby inducing dean drag forces acting on particles . In addition , the particles are influenced by inertial lift forces throughout the contraction regions . these two forces act in opposite directions each other throughout the CEA microchannel , and their force balancing determines whether the particles cross the channel , following dean flows . here we describe the physics and design of the CEA microfluidic device , and demonstrate complete separation of microparticles ( polystyrene beads of <nUm> and <nUm> mm in diameter ) and efficient exchange of the carrier medium while retaining <nUm> mm beads . 
A lattice boltzmann equation method based on the cahn - hilliard diffuse interface theory is developed to investigate the bubble formation process in a microchannel with t-junction mixing geometry . the bubble formation process has different regimes , namely , squeezing , dripping and jetting regimes , which correspond to the primary forces acting on the system . transition from regime to regime is generally dictated by the capillary number Ca , volumetric flow ratio q and viscosity ratio λ . A systematic analysis is performed to evaluate these effects . the computations are performed in the range of 10-4 < Ca < <nUm> , <nUm> < q < <nUm> and 10-2 < λ < <nUm> , with the equilibrium contact angle varying from <nUm> ° to <nUm> ° . 
In this paper , the design , fabrication and experimental analysis of a piezoelectrically actuated micro squeeze flow rheometer is presented . being only <nUm> × <nUm> × <nUm> mm in size , the micro rheometer is sensitive to very small volumes of the order of 1-10 nL of liquid and light enough to operate at frequencies in the kHz regime , an order of magnitude higher than normally attainable with conventional cone and plate rheometry . initial experiments show that the response of the rheometer is dependent on the viscoelasticity of the fluid being tested . the prototype was used to measure the moduli of poly(dimethylsiloxane) ( PDMS ) of viscosity <nUm> Pa s , a non-volatile viscoelastic fluid , over the frequency range of 10-1000 Hz . results show good agreement between with the moduli measured using conventional rheometry up to <nUm> Hz and with values extrapolated up to <nUm> kHz . 
the aim of this work is to investigate experimentally the bubble breakup in a microfluidic t-junction divergence using a high - speed digital camera and a micro-Particle image velocimetry ( micro-PIV ) system . the breakup and non-breakup of N bubbles in glycerol - water mixtures with several concentrations of sodium dodecyl sulphate ( SDS ) as surfactant were studied with capillary number ranging from <nUm> to <nUm> . the cross section of PMMA square microchannel is 400gm wide and 400gm deep . four various flow patterns were observed at the t-junction by changing gas and liquid flow rates . the dynamics of three various types of symmetric breakup of bubbles were investigated . the symmetric breakup of bubbles type I is mainly controlled by the augmented pressure in liquid phase . the symmetric breakup of bubbles type II is controlled by both the increased pressure and viscous forces . In the symmetric breakup of bubbles type III , a scaling law for the minimum bubble neck and the remaining time during bubble breaking process were found . the transitions between breakup and non-breakup of bubbles were investigated , and a power - law relationship between bubble extension and capillary number was proposed to predict the transitions between adjacent regimes . our experimental results reveal that the bubble breakup in a microfluidic t-junction divergence is similar to the droplet behaviours in such a device ( jullien et al. , <nUm> ; leshansky and pismen , <nUm> ; link et al. , <nUm> ) . 
A thermodynamic description of liquid flows in capillaries with hydrodynamic slip at the solid - liquid interface is given . slip over the capillary wall brings into play surface interactions and therefore involves interfacial energy and entropy . energy and entropy balance equations are written so as to take into account surface effects . the two relations constitute a general mathematical model that allows readily analyzing various situations and to explore the behavior of such thermodynamic process . the main result derived concerns the existence of a capillary pressure of slip ; slip occurrence leads to a pressure decrease in the flow and might cause cavitation . the variation in magnitude of the slip effect , viewed as a thermodynamic transformation , may take place irreversibly . slip irreversibility and the probable occurrence of a two - phase flow regime are possible factors that may cause additional pressure drop . 
currently , most microfluidic devices are fabricated with embedded micro-channels and other elements in a close form with outward connections . although much functionality has been demonstrated and a large number of applications have been developed , they are not easy for routine operation in biology laboratories where most in vitro cell processing still relies on the use of culture dishes , glass slides , multi-well plates , tubes , pipettes , etc . we report here an open access device which consists of an array of isolated micro-channels plated on a large culture surface , each of them having tiny nozzles for localized drug delivery . In a diffusion dominant regime , steady gradients of molecule concentration could be obtained and varied by changing the flow rate inside the micro-channels . As assay examples , cell staining and drug - induced cell apoptosis were demonstrated , showing fast cell responses in close proximity of the nozzles . 
next generation battery technology is rapidly evolving to meet the demand for higher power densities and smaller footprints through novel catalysts and battery architecture . we present a m-scale , biological fuel cell which utilizes microbial electricity generation enabled by microfluidic flow control to produce power . the new fuel cell , the smallest of its kind , with a total volume of <nUm> mL , produces scalable and controllable electrical energy from organic matter which is sustained through microbial respiration and laminar flow separation of the electrolytes . electrical currents are dependent on specific biofilm formation on the anode , the concentration of electron donor , and a diffusion - limited flow regime . A maximum current density of <nUm> ± 3.48mAm-2 ( <nUm> ± 17Am-3 ) was produced by geobacter sulfurreducens , and 25.42mAm-2 ( 127Am-3 ) by shewanella oneidensis . the m-scale biological fuel cell introduces the necessary small size and fuel flexibility for applications in vivo and in situ sensors which may be remotely deployed and self - powered . 
highly non-linear flows of semi-dilute ( <nUm> ≤ c / c* ≤ <nUm> ) polyacrylamide ( PAAm ) aqueous solutions through three micro-fabricated <nUm> : <nUm> : <nUm> , <nUm> : <nUm> : <nUm> and <nUm> : <nUm> : <nUm> contraction - expansion geometries have been investigated by micro-particle imaging velocimetry ( m-PIV ) and pressure drop measurements . A set of quantitative data for PAAm solutions are obtained from : gel permeation chromatography ( GPC ) analysis ; rheometric characterization using vilastic-3 and piezoelastic axial vibrator ( PAV ) with frequency up to <nUm> . Hz for linear viscoelasticity measurements , and using a microfluidic device for the measurement of the nonlinear shear viscosity . with three different flow geometries , and a wide range of elasticity numbers ( <nUm> ≤ el ≤ <nUm> ) and weissenberg numbers ( <nUm> ≤ wi ≤ <nUm> ) , different nonlinear flow regimes are identified and correlated to vortex growth mechanisms . results of similar el flows were mapped in a contraction ratio - wi diagram . we found that under a given flow geometry tuning el can either increase or decrease the stability of the nonlinear flow structures . In addition to wi and Re , the viscoelastic flow phenomena are dependent on the contraction and aspect ratios of flow geometry , and also sensitive to the molecular weight distribution of polymer . these results are of significance to the further development of microfluidic technologies . 
we describe a method to induce by light a reversible switch from a continuous two - phase laminar flow to a droplet generating regime , in microfluidic devices with a usual water - in - oil flow focusing geometry . it consists in adding a photosensitive surfactant to the aqueous phase to modulate using light the interfacial energy between flowing liquids and the microfluidic substrate . we show that UV irradiation induces liquid fragmentation into monodisperse water microdroplets and that many cycles of reversible and rapid switches ( < <nUm> s ) between continuous laminar flows and stable droplet regimes can be realized . by spatially controlling the application of the light stimulus , we also demonstrate the first spatially resolved remote induction of droplet generation . 
we study experimentally the interfacial instability between a layer of dilute polymer solution and water flowing in a thin capillary . the use of microfluidic devices allows us to observe and quantify in great detail the features of the flow . At low velocities , the flow takes the form of a straight jet , while at high velocities , steady or advected wavy jets are produced . we demonstrate that the transition between these flow regimes is purely elastic-it is caused by the viscoelasticity of the polymer solution only . the linear stability analysis of the flow in the short - wave approximation supplemented with a kinematic criterion captures quantitatively the flow diagram . surprisingly , unstable flows are observed for strong velocities , whereas convected flows are observed for low velocities . we demonstrate that this instability can be used to measure the rheological properties of dilute polymer solutions that are difficult to assess otherwise . 
this paper presents some experimental results on two - phase flows in model two - dimensional ( 2D ) porous media with different wetting properties . standard microfluidic techniques are used to fabricate the 2D micromodels that consist of a network of straight microchannels having heterogeneous sizes . the invasion mechanism is analyzed quantitatively for partial and total wetting conditions , and for various stable viscosity ratios and capillary pressure heterogeneity . for capillary numbers ranging from 10-7 to 10-2 , we observe a transition between capillary fingering and a stable front . the capillary fingering regime exhibits differences between partial and complete wetting systems : the front width in complete wetting is larger . simple models are proposed to account for these regimes and indicate that the differences between the systems are likely to be due to the flow of the displaced fluid in the complete wetting situation . 
we analyse the characteristics of two - fluid mixing in t-shaped microchannels on rotating platforms ( lab - on - a - compact - disk framework ) . three regimes of mixing were identified based on the distinct flow behaviour in each of these regimes . A diffusion - based mixing regime was obtained for low rotation speeds . A coriolis force based mixing regime was observed for intermediate rotation speeds , which introduced some nontrivial aspects in the mixing behaviour , which was explained through scaling analysis . At very high rotational speeds , rapid mixing close to the junction was achieved by exploiting flow instabilities ( instability based mixing ) . A good agreement between the theoretical calculations and the experimental observations was obtained . 
microdroplet formation is an emerging area of research due to its wide - ranging applications within microfluidic based lab - on - a - chip devices . our goal is to understand the dynamics of droplet formation in a microfluidic t-junction in order to optimize the operation of the microfluidic device . understanding of this process forms the basis of many potential applications : synthesis of new materials , formulation of products in pharmaceutical , cosmetics and food industries . the two - phase level set method , which is ideally suited for tracking the interfaces between two immiscible fluids , has been used to perform numerical simulations of droplet formation in a t-junction . numerical predictions compare well with experimental observations . the influence of parameters such as flow rate ratio , capillary number , viscosity ratio and the interfacial tension between the two immiscible fluids is known to affect the physical processes of droplet generation . In this study the effects of surface wettability , which can be controlled by altering the contact angle , are investigated systematically . As competitive wetting between liquids in a two - phase flow can give rise to erratic flow patterns , it is often desirable to minimize this phenomenon as it can lead to a disruption of the regular production of uniform droplets . the numerical simulations predicted that wettability effects on droplet length are more prominent when the viscosity ratio λ ( the quotient of the viscosity of the dispersed phase with the viscosity of the continuous phase ) is O(1) , compared to the situation when λ is O(0.1) . the droplet size becomes independent of contact angle in the superhydrophobic regime for all capillary numbers . At a given value of interfacial tension , the droplet length is greater when λ is O(1) compared to the case when λ is O(0.1) . the increase in droplet length with interfacial tension , σ , is a function of lns with the coefficients of the regression curves depending on the viscosity ratio . 
using a lattice boltzmann multiphase model , three - dimensional numerical simulations have been performed to understand droplet formation in microfluidic cross-junctions at low capillary numbers . flow regimes , consequence of interaction between two immiscible fluids , are found to be dependent on the capillary number and flow rates of the continuous and dispersed phases . A regime map is created to describe the transition from droplets formation at a cross-junction ( DCJ ) , downstream of cross-junction to stable parallel flows . the influence of flow rate ratio , capillary number , and channel geometry is then systematically studied in the squeezing - pressure - dominated DCJ regime . the plug length is found to exhibit a linear dependence on the flow rate ratio and obey power - law behavior on the capillary number . the channel geometry plays an important role in droplet breakup process . A scaling model is proposed to predict the plug length in the DCJ regime with the fitting constants depending on the geometrical parameters . 
the membraneless microfluidic fuel cell ( MFC ) is a promising micro-scale power source with potentially wide applications . MFC commonly relies on the co-laminar microfluidic platform in which redox streams flow in parallel in a microchannel . the nature of this cell architecture limits the mass transport inside the cell , often resulting in low power density . to overcome the issues , we propose an innovative concept of chaotic flow - based fuel cell ( CFFC ) , which is built on a counter-flow microfluidic platform with the flow channel patterned with micro-ridges . A CFD / electrochemical model is used to predict the performance and investigate the underlay mechanism of the CFFC . two theoretical upper bounds , i.e. , the limiting current and limiting fuel conversion for conventional MFC , are derived . through the results , it is found that the generation of chaotic flow inside the patterned activation zone enables the CFFC to exceed the theoretical limitations and work with over-limiting current for high - power output . meanwhile , the interfacial mixing and crossover is minimized by the counter-flow microfluidics , allowing for over-limiting fuel conversion to useful electricity output . the achievement of unprecedented operating regime demonstrated in this study open up a new direction towards optimization , operating and design of the MFC . 
the particular benefits of microfluidic systems , in terms of heat and mass transfer enhancement , require conducting local flow diagnostics , especially when unsteady properties of the microflow can play a critical role at the reaction interface , as currently observed in the fields of bioengineering and chemical engineering . the present paper focuses on unsteady confined flows within microsystems characterized by various geometries of crossing channels and exhibiting high surface - to - volume ratios . an experimental analysis of the signal measured at microsensors embedded to the wall of microsystems is discussed . In the objective of performing flow diagnostics , including regime identification and wall flow structure recognition , two methods for electrochemical signal processing are investigated and compared within an experimental network of crossing minichannels . one method is based on the use of a transfer function , while the other , the so - called sobolik solution ( sobolik et al. in coll czech chem commun <nUm> : <nUm> - <nUm> , <nUm> ) , consists of finding a direct solution to the mass balance equation . sobolik 's method has been selected given its ability to provide a description , over a wide range of reynolds numbers ( <nUm> < Re < <nUm> ) , for all wall shear rate fluctuations , as well as for the associated mixing scales in the power spectra density ( PSD ) . this technique is then applied to flow within micromixers composed of two crossing microchannels in order to study highly unsteady and inhomogeneous microflows . the hydraulic diameters of the studied channels are <nUm> and <nUm> mm , respectively . two flow patterns are investigated herein : the crossing - flow type and the impinging flow ( or so called co-flow ) for a reynolds number range between <nUm> and <nUm> . the PSD of wall shear rate fluctuations reveals various flow characteristics depending on the microchannel aspect ratio . 
an alignment - free and low - cost microfabrication technique for dual - opposite silver electrodes inside a polydimethylsiloxane ( PDMS ) microchannel is presented using multiphase fluids with density difference in a laminar flow regime without a photolithographic process . the electrode patterns were created using chemical deposition at the interface between a silver electroless plating solution ( denser fluid ) and a reducer solution ( less dense fluid ) . the gravitational force induced by the density difference causes a slight rotation of the interface in the downstream direction , thereby resulting in the dual - opposite electrodes having individual electrical connection patterned on the top and bottom walls of the PDMS microchannel . 
particles , bubbles , and drops carried by a fluid in a confined environment such as a pipe can be subjected to hydrodynamic lift forces , i.e. , forces that are perpendicular to the direction of the flow . we investigated the positioning effect of lift forces acting on buoyant drops and bubbles suspended in a carrier fluid and flowing in a horizontal microchannel . we report experiments on drops of water in fluorocarbon liquid , and on bubbles of nitrogen in hydrocarbon liquid and silicone oil , inside microchannels with widths on the order of 0.1-1 mm . despite their buoyancy , drops and bubbles could travel without contacting with the walls of channels ; the most important parameters for reaching this flow regime in our experiments were the viscosity and the velocity of the carrier fluid , and the sizes of drops and bubbles . the dependencies of the transverse position of drops and bubbles on these parameters were investigated . At steady state , the trajectories of drops and bubbles approached the center of the channel for drops and bubbles almost as large as the channel , carried by rapidly flowing viscous liquids ; among our experiments , these flow conditions were characterized by larger capillary numbers and smaller reynolds numbers . analytical models of lift forces developed for the flow of drops much smaller than the width of the channel failed to predict their transverse position , while computational fluid dynamic simulations of the experiments agreed better with the experimental measurements . the degrees of success of these predictions indicate the importance of confinement on generating strong hydrodynamic lift forces . we conclude that , inside microfluidic channels , it is possible to support and position buoyant drops and bubbles simply by flowing a single - stream ( i.e. , " sheathless " ) carrier liquid that has appropriate velocity and hydrodynamic properties . 
we report simulations of gas - liquid two - phase flows in microchannels periodically patterned with grooves and ridges . A constant effective body force is applied on both fluids to simulate a pressure - driven creeping flow , and a diffuse - interface model is used to compute the interfacial evolution and the contact line motion . depending on the body force , capillary force and the level of liquid saturation , a number of flow regimes may appear in the corrugated microchannel : gas flow , blockage , liquid flow , bubble - slug flow , droplet flow , annular flow and annular - droplet flow . A map of flow regimes is constructed for a set of geometric and flow parameters starting from a prescribed initial configuration . some of the regimes are new , while others have been observed before in straight tubes and pipes . the latter are compared with previous experiments in terms of the regime map and the holdup ratio . the transition among flow regimes shows significant hysteresis , largely owing to the pinning of the interface at sharp corners in the flow conduit . hysteresis is reduced if the sharp corners are rounded . under the same operating conditions , different flow regimes can be realized from different initial conditions . the roles of geometry and wettability of the channel walls are also elucidated . 
In this numerical study we investigate the flow induced by metachronal coordination between beating cilia arranged in a densely packed layer by means of a continuum model . the continuum approach allows us to treat the problem as two - dimensional as well as stationary , in a reference frame moving with the speed of the metachronal wave . the model is used as a computationally efficient design tool to investigate cilia - induced transport of a newtonian fluid in a plane channel . contrary to prior continuum models , the present approach accounts for spatial variations in the porosity along the metachronal wave and thus ensures conservation of mass within the cilia layer . using porous - media theory the governing volume - averaged naviera € " stokes ( VANS ) equations are derived and closure formulations are given explicitly for the model . this makes it possible to investigate cilia - induced flow with a continuum model in both the viscous regime and the inertial regime . the results show that metachronal coordination can act as a transport mechanism in both regimes . porosity variations appear to be the key mechanism for correct prediction of the fluid transport in the viscous flow regime . the reason is that spatial variations in the porosity break the symmetry of the drag distribution along the metachronal wave . A new insight that has been gained is that the fluid transport reverses , thus switches from plectic to antiplectic metachronism , for the same cilia beat cycle when the wavespeed is increased such that inertial effects occur . based on a parameter study , the net transport in the channel is described by a power - law relation of the amplitude , length and speed of the metachronal wave . it is found that the wavelength has the strongest effect on the viscosity - dominated fluid transport . 
we study a liquid jet that breaks up into drops in an external co-flowing liquid inside a confining microfluidic geometry . the jet breakup can occur right after the nozzle in a phenomenon named dripping or through the generation of a liquid jet that breaks up a long distance from the nozzle , which is called jetting . traditionally , these two regimes have been considered to reflect the existence of two kinds of spatiotemporal instabilities of a fluid jet , the dripping regime corresponding to an absolutely unstable jet and the jetting regime to a convectively unstable jet . here , we present quantitative measurements of the dripping and jetting regimes , both in an unforced and a forced state , and compare these measurements with recent theoretical studies of spatiotemporal instability of a confined liquid jet in a co-flowing liquid . In the unforced state , the frequency of oscillation and breakup of the liquid jet is measured and compared to the theoretical predictions . the dominant frequency of the jet oscillations as a function of the inner flow rate agrees qualitatively with the theoretical predictions in the jetting regime but not in the dripping regime . In the forced state , achieved with periodic laser heating , the dripping regime is found to be insensitive to the perturbation and the frequency of drop formation remains unaltered . the jetting regime , on the contrary , amplifies the externally imposed frequency , which translates into the formation of drops at the frequency imposed by the external forcing . In conclusion , the dripping and jetting regimes are found to exhibit the main features of absolutely and convectively unstable flows , respectively , but the frequency selection in the dripping regime is not ruled by the absolute frequency predicted by the stability analysis . 
the flow around a cylinder rolling or sliding on a wall was investigated analytically and numerically for small reynolds numbers , where the flow is known to be two - dimensional and steady . both prograde and retrograde rotation were analytically solved , in the stokes regime , giving the values of forces and torque and a complete description of the flow . however , solving navier - stokes equation , a rotation of the cylinder near the wall necessarily induces a cavitation bubble in the nip if the fluid is a liquid , or compressible effects , if it is a gas . therefore , an infinite lift force is generated , disconnecting the cylinder from the wall . the flow inside this interstice was then solved under the lubrication assumptions and fully described for a completely flooded interstice . numerical results extend the analysis to higher reynolds number . finally , the effect of the upstream pressure on the onset of cavitation is studied , giving the initial location of the phenomenon and the relation between the upstream pressure and the flow rate in the interstice . it is shown that the flow in the interstice must become three - dimensional when cavitation takes place . 
complex electroosmotic flow patterns induced by imposing external electric potentials on an electrolyte fluid contained in a microchannel with uniform and spatially - variable ( sinusoidal ) surface charges are given in this article . the two - dimensional navier - stokes equations coupled with the electric potential equations are solved to generate various flow patterns in the limit of the stokes flow regime i.e. , Re ∼ <nUm> . the coupled system of equations was re-formulated using the vorticity - stream function formulations and have been solved numerically using a second order accurate finite differencing method . two main groups of cases based on the external potential distributions that assigned to both top and bottom walls are investigated in details . results have shown that , a simple surface charge distribution can lead to complex electroosmotic flow patterns . for example , different vortical motions such as single and multiple vortices have been generated to show the potential of using electrokinetics phenomena ( non-intrusive method ) to pattern the flow field in microchannels . this simulation can form a basis to study mixing at the microscale for electrically - driven flows . 
In this study , we present experiments on the generation and control of droplets with a wide range of size in a microfluidic device composed of flowfocusing ( cross-junction ) geometry with a converging - diverging nozzle - shaped section . the microfluidic structure was made of poly(dimethylsiloxane) ( PDMS ) for the generation of water - in - oil droplets . it is found that adding the converging - diverging section to the cross-junction significantly reduces the droplet size without greatly increasing the overall flow resistance and still achieves good uniformity . the throat of the converging - diverging section determines the breakup location of the droplet emulsion . the effects of the throat width on the scaling for the size of droplets are most pronounced in the higher range of the continuous - phase to dispersed - phase flow rate ratio , where the shear - driven mechanism dominates the breakup . In this regime , the shearing effects are largely enhanced by the strong acceleration and deceleration created in the converging - diverging section . these effects enable us to generate droplets with a wide range of diameter , including those as small as <nUm> mm or less , in the microfluidic devices having channel dimensions on the order of <nUm> mrn . 
when droplets enter a junction they sort to the channel with the highest flow rate at that instant . transport is regulated by a discrete time - delayed feedback that results in a highly periodic behavior where specific patterns can continue to cycle indefinitely . between these highly ordered regimes are chaotic structures where no pattern is evident . here we develop a model that describes droplet sorting under various asymmetries : branch geometry ( length , cross-section ) , droplet resistance and pressures . first , a model is developed based on the continuum assumption and then , with the assistance of numerical simulations , a discrete model is derived to predict the length and composition of the sorting pattern . furthermore we derive all unique sequences that are possible for a given distribution and develop a preliminary estimation of why chaotic regimes form . the model is validated by comparing it to numerical simulations and results from microfluidic experiments in PDMS chips with good agreement . 
In this study we report on a microfluidic device and droplet formation regime capable of generating clinical - scale quantities of droplet emulsions suitable in size and functionality for in vivo therapeutics . by increasing the capillary number - based on the flow rate of the continuous outer phase - in our flow - focusing device , we examine three modes of droplet breakup : geometry - controlled , dripping , and jetting . operation of our device in the dripping regime results in the generation of highly monodisperse liquid perfluoropentane droplets in the appropriate 3-6 mm range at rates exceeding <nUm> droplets per second . based on experimental results relating droplet diameter and the ratio of the continuous and dispersed phase flow rates , we derive a power series equation , valid in the dripping regime , to predict droplet size , dd ≅ <nUm> ( QC / QD ) <nUm> / <nUm> . the volatile droplets in this study are stable for weeks at room temperature yet undergo rapid liquid - to - gas phase transition , and volume expansion , above a uniform thermal activation threshold . the opportunity exists to potentiate locoregional cancer therapies such as thermal ablation and percutaneous ethanol injection using thermal or acoustic vaporization of these monodisperse phase - change droplets to intentionally occlude the vessels of a cancer . 
In this work , we report a rich sequence of elastic transitions captured experimentally using a viscoelastic , shear - thinning solution . the experiments were carried out in a microchannel with a sudden contraction followed by a smooth expansion , taking advantage of the distinctive conditions provided by microfluidic viscoelastic flows , i.e the capability of achieving high deborah numbers ( de ) while keeping the reynolds numbers low enough so that inertia does not have a significant impact . we studied the effect of de on the flow patterns and were able to achieve a flow regime , at sufficiently high de , in which the flow becomes unsteady with the main vortices formed upstream of the contraction varying in size substantially and very rapidly resembling what afonso et al. [1] coined as the back - shedding regime . this process is accompanied by the formation of secondary vortices , which are shed in the upstream flow direction . A similar phenomenon was also captured by our preliminary numerical simulations performed using the Oldroyd-B constitutive equation . 
we consider the stability of a thin liquid film with a free charged surface resting on a solid charged substrate by performing a general orr - sommerfeld ( O-S ) analysis complemented by a long - wave ( LW ) analysis . an externally applied field generates an electroosmotic flow ( EOF ) near the solid substrate and an electrophoretic flow ( EPF ) at the free surface . the EPF retards the EOF when both the surfaces have the same sign of the potential and can even lead to the flow reversal in a part of the film . In conjunction with the hydrodynamic stress , the maxwell stress is also considered in the problem formulation . the electrokinetic potential at the liquid - air and solid - liquid interfaces is modelled by the poisson - boltzmann equation with the debye - huckel approximation . the O-S analysis shows a finite - wavenumber shear mode of instability when the inertial forces are strong and an LW interfacial mode of instability in the regime where the viscous force dominates . interestingly , both the modes are found to form beyond a critical flow rate . the shear ( interfacial ) mode is found to be dominant when the film is thick ( thin ) , the electric field applied is strong ( weak ) , and the zeta-potentials on the liquid - air and solid - liquid interfaces are high ( small ) . the LW analysis predicts the presence of the interfacial mode , but fails to capture the shear mode . the change in the propagation direction of the interfacial mode with the zeta-potential is predicted by both O-S and LW analyses . the parametric range in which the LW analysis is valid is thus demonstrated . 
the electrochemical oxidation of organics in water performed in micro reactors on boron doped diamond ( BDD ) anode was investigated both theoretically and experimentally in order to find the influence of various operative parameters on the conversion and the current efficiency CE of the process . the electrochemical oxidation of formic acid ( FA ) was selected as a model case . high conversions for a single passage of the electrolytic solution inside the cell were obtained by operating with proper residence times and low distances between cathode and anode . the effect of initial concentration , flow rate and current density was investigated in detail . theoretical predictions were in very good agreement with experimental results for both mass transfer control , oxidation reaction control and mixed kinetic regimes in spite of the fact that no adjustable parameters was used . mass transfer process was successfully modelled by considering for simplicity a constant sh number ( e.g. , a constant mass transfer coefficient km ) for a process performed with no high values of the current intensity to minimize the effect of the gas bubbling on the flowdynamic pattern . for mixed kinetic regimes , two different modelling approaches were used . In the first one , the oxidation of organics at BDD was assumed to be mass transfer controlled and to occur with an intrinsic <nUm> % CE when applied current density is higher than the limiting current density . In the second case , the CE of the process was modelled assuming that the competition between organic and water oxidation depends only on the electrodic material and on the nature and the concentration of the organic . In the latter case a better agreement between experimental data and theoretical predictions was observed . 
contemporary optical effects and photonic component necessary for the realization of nanoscale integrated photonic circuit for developing lab - on - a - chipincluding light sources , detectors and filters is summarized . we present the concept of a lab - on - a - chip for the next generation optoelectronics and biophotonic industry including novel nanoscale material systems for lasers and detectors . using principles such as plasmonics and near - field optics highly efficient nanophotonic lasers or modulators can be realized . the light source can be tuned from the UV to the visible range using ion implantation of noble metal such as Ag or Au in silicon or silica . the presence of Ag or Ag nanoparticles can result in a significant enhancement of the light emission in the UV , green or red wavelength regime . novel molecular electronics materials has been used to design olegonucleotide based photodetectors on transparent substrates for the detection of analytes in an all - optical system . either a transparent GaN semiconductor or glass can be used as an substrate . hybrid photonic crystal based microfluidic channels synthesized using hydrogel material can be optimized to control the flow of fluid using light . In this paper , the device components developed at the university of north texas will be presented for the realization of a lab - on - a - chip . 
A test rig to study r134a flow boiling inside mini and micro-channels has been constructed . the test section is made up of a glass tube and several ITO conductive layers as heaters . A novel image processing technique has been developed for the study of r134a flow boiling regimes . the software routine extracts the bubble contours , measures geometrical features of each frame and collects the data analytically and statistically . the results refer to mass flux between <nUm> and <nUm> kg / m2 s and the heat flux between <nUm> and <nUm> W / m2 , at the saturation temperatures of 20-25 ° C . the tube inner diameter is <nUm> mm and the heated length was globally of <nUm> mm , distributed in eight shorter heaters of <nUm> mm each . the main goals are the development of a method that , starting from the analysis of several parameters , is able to identify the flow pattern inside the tube , as well as the study of the effects of coalescence on the flow pattern development along the tube . the flow patterns have been identified from a statistical point of view and the " transition zone " has been quantitatively characterized . part of the analysis is then devoted to the flow pattern variation along the test section . the experiments demonstrated that coalescence is a phenomenon that can be analyzed also in terms of a statistical approach and that the flow pattern variations are not only a function of the mass flux and the quality , but along the tube bubble coalescence and gravity effects have a role in the flow patterns appearance . 
wormlike micellar surfactant solutions are encountered in a wide variety of important applications , including enhanced oil recovery and ink - jet printing , in which the fluids are subjected to high extensional strain rates . In this contribution we present an experimental investigation of the flow of a model wormlike micellar solution ( cetyl pyridinium chloride and sodium salicylate in deionised water ) in a well - defined stagnation point extensional flow field generated within a microfluidic cross-slot device . we use micro-particle image velocimetry ( m-PIV ) and full - field birefringence microscopy coupled with macroscopic measurements of the bulk pressure drop to make a quantitative characterization of the fluid 's rheological response over a wide range of deformation rates . the flow field in the micromachined cross-slot is first characterized for viscous flow of a newtonian fluid , and m-PIV measurements show the flow field remains symmetric and stable up to moderately high reynolds number , Re ≈ <nUm> , and nominal strain rate , nom ≈ <nUm> s <nUm> . by contrast , in the viscoelastic micellar solution the flow field remains symmetric only for low values of the strain rate such that nom ≤ λ m <nUm> , where λ m = <nUm> s is the maxwell relaxation time of the fluid . In this stable flow regime the fluid displays a localized and elongated birefringent strand extending along the outflow streamline from the stagnation point , and estimates of the apparent extensional viscosity can be obtained using the stress - optical rule and from the total pressure drop measured across the cross-slot channel . for moderate deformation rates ( nom ≥ λ m <nUm> ) the flow remains steady , but becomes increasingly asymmetric with increasing flow rate , eventually achieving a steady state of complete anti-symmetry characterized by a dividing streamline and birefringent strand connecting diagonally opposite corners of the cross-slot . eventually , as the nominal imposed deformation rate is increased further , the asymmetric divided flow becomes time dependent . these purely elastic instabilities are reminiscent of those observed in cross-slot flows of polymer solutions , but seem to be strongly influenced by the effects of shear localization of the micellar fluid within the microchannels and around the re-entrant corners of the cross-slot . 
we conduct a numerical study to investigate the effect of surfactants on the drop formation process in a co-flowing system using a hybrid volume - of - fluid ( VOF ) method combined with a front - tracking scheme . the drop and bulk phases are treated as incompressible newtonian fluids , and the surfactants are modeled using a langmuir adsorption framework . we consider the effect of soluble surfactants in the adsorption - desorption limit on the drop formation process . A drop in the co-flowing geometry typically breaks up at the primary neck , close to the primary drop , in the absence of surfactants . when surfactants are present , they accumulate in the neck region resulting in marangoni stresses that slow down the neck thinning rate . this results in longer breakup times with larger drop volumes . At high surfactant coverages , the primary neck formation slows down enough and breakup occurs at the secondary neck , close to the remnant drop . increasing the outer co-flowing flow weakens the retarding effect of the high surfactant coverage leading to breakup again at the primary neck . the adsorption - desorption kinetics also affects the neck breakup position , and the primary drop volume and breakup time depend non-linearly on the biot number . for any given biot number , a critical fractional coverage exists beyond which the drop fails to neck . the presence of a confining wall may lower the value of the critical equilibrium fractional coverage required for the drop to enter the no - necking regime . 
In this article , we report the design , fabrication and characterization of a chemical minireactor for direct fluorination . the minichannels ( <nUm> mm × 1. mm ) were investigated for gas - liquid flow in a slug - flow regime . the generated slugs were analyzed for a variation of gas and liquid flow rates and the measured lengths correspond with microfluidic models and measurements . from the slug lengths , the interfacial area per liquid flow was determined . As a first test reaction , the fluorination of ethylene carbonate ( EC ) was investigated . the multiphase minireactor facilitates a continuous direct fluorination of EC at <nUm> ° C with up to <nUm> % fluorine concentration . the reaction could be run almost isothermic in the entire reaction minichannel and the chemically resistant nickel coating showed no corrosion after 100. h of process time . nuclear magnetic resonance ( NMR ) spectroscopy showed the cyclically running reaction to have unprecedented fluorine conversation rates of up to <nUm> % and yields of 60-79 % . 
local control of droplet formation with acoustic actuation in a microfluidic flow - focusing device is investigated , and the effects of acoustic voltage , frequency , flow - rate ratio , fluid viscosity , and flow vorticity are characterized . acoustic actuation is provided to affect droplet breakup in the squeezing regime by imposing periodic oscillation to the fluid - fluid interface and , therefore , a periodic change in its curvature at the cross-junction of the device . time reduction is observed for the three key stages of droplet breakup in the squeezing regime : dispersed phase flow - front advancement into the orifice , pressure buildup upstream and within the orifice together with liquid inflation downstream , and finally the thinning and pinch - off of the liquid thread . it is found that acoustic actuation has less of an effect on droplet size for the continuous phase with a higher viscosity due to the restrained interfacial vibration under a high shear stress environment . periodic velocity flow fields within the dispersed phase at different phases of one oscillation cycle are calculated based on the results from phase - averaged microresolution-particle-image velocimetry ( mPIV ) . the oscillation paths for the points of maximum vorticities of phase - averaged velocity components are traced , which reveals that the motion is mainly along the y direction . 
we report how a nominally symmetric microfluidic junction can be used to sort all bubbles of an incoming train exclusively into one of its arms . the existence of this " filter " regime is unexpected , given that the junction is symmetric . we analyze this behavior by quantifying how bubbles modulate the hydrodynamic resistance in microchannels and show how speeding up a bubble train whilst preserving its spatial periodicity can lead to filtering at a nominally symmetric junction . we further show how such an asymmetric traffic of bubble trains can be triggered in symmetric geometries by identifying conditions wherein the resistance to flow decreases with an increase in the number of bubbles in the microchannel and derive an exact criterion to predict the same . 
In non-Newtonian fluids , the mass or heat transfer on particles are of major interest in many industrial processes using suspensions such as fluidized beds or microfluidics reactors . In all these problems we often face hydrodynamic and mass or thermal interactions between a single particle and others or between a single particle and some walls . In this study , such confined configurations can be modeled by a spherical particle translating parallel to the axis of a cylindrical tube . As the suspending fluid may be non-Newtonian , and before examining any possible additional viscoelastic effect on suspension , the first step in the understanding of the consequences of the principal non-Newtonian behavior is the study of the shear thickening or shear thinning ( power law model ) regarding the transfer phenomena . then , when the particle translates along the axis of the tube in symmetrical configuration , we numerically solved the momentum and mass ( or heat ) transfer equations using the stream / vorticity functions formulation coupled to the singularity technique in order to make a numerical conformal mapping for the mesh . for newtonian fluids , the successful comparisons firstly between our numerical results and asymptotical solutions obtained by us in the lubrication regime , and secondly between our results and those obtained by other authors in unlimited medium , confirm the validity of our approach . thereby we extended this method to power law fluids . As the geometrical distribution of particles in suspensions is not at all symmetric , we study the influence of some geometrical disturbance breaking the symmetry of the system . to answer this question , we numerically investigate , using the finite volume method , the simple configuration of single spherical particles translating parallel to and in the off - axis position in the tube . 
two - phase microfluidic heat exchangers have the potential to provide high - heat flux cooling with lower thermal resistance and lower pumping power than single - phase heat exchangers . however , the process of phase change in two - phase heat exchangers can cause flow instabilities that lead to microchannel dryout and device failure [1-3] . modeling these flow instabilities remains challenging because the key physics are highly coupled and occur over disparate time and length scales . this work introduces a new approach to capture transient thermal and fluidic transport with a reduced - order model consisting of fluidic , thermal , and phase - change submodels . the present study presents a reduced - order , transient , multichannel fluidic circuit submodel for integration into this proposed modeling approach . the fluidic submodel is applicable in flow regimes in which a thin liquid film exists around the bubble . flow response to boiling is modeled considering bubble overpressure . an adaptive time step approach is used to treat the rapid flow response at short time scales after initial bubble vaporization . using a seeded bubble technique for testing two - phase flow response , the model predicts a stability threshold at <nUm> W of localized superheating for two 100-micron square channels in parallel with a pump flow rate of <nUm> ml / min . once integrated with the proposed reduced - order thermal and phase change models , this fluidic circuit model will yield criteria for stable two - phase heat exchanger operation considering factors such as pumping pressure , channel geometry , and applied heat flux that can be compared to experimental observations . 
semiflexible polymers subject to hydrodynamic forcing play an important role in cytoskeletal motions in the cell , particularly when filaments guide molecular motors whose motions create flows . near hyperbolic stagnation points , filaments experience a competition between bending elasticity and tension and are predicted to display suppressed thermal fluctuations in the extensional regime and a buckling instability under compression . using a microfluidic cross-flow geometry , we verify these predictions in detail , including a fluctuation - rounded stretch - coil transition of actin filaments . 
numerous studies have addressed the challenges of implementing miniaturized microfluidic platforms for chemical and biological separation applications . however , the integration of real time detection schemes capable of providing valuable sample information under continuous , ultra low volume flow regimes has not fully been addressed . In this report we present a chip based chromatography system comprising of a pillar array separation column followed by a reagent channel for passive mixing of a silver colloidal solution into the eluent stream to enable surface enhanced raman spectroscopy ( SERS ) detection . our design is the first integrated chip based microfluidic device to combine pressure driven separation capability with real time SERS detection . with this approach we demonstrate the ability to collect distinctive SERS spectra with or without complete resolution of chromatographic bands . computational fluidic dynamic ( CFD ) simulations are used to model the diffusive mixing behaviour and velocity profiles of the two confluent streams in the microfluidic channels . we evaluate the SERS spectral band intensity and chromatographic efficiency of model analytes with respect to kinetic factors as well as signal acquisition rates . additionally , we discuss the use of a pluronic modified silver colloidal solution as a means of eliminating contamination generally caused by nanoparticle adhesion to channel surfaces . 
In this paper , we consider asymptotic models for miscible flows in microchannels . the characteristics of the flows in microfluidics imply that usually the hele - shaw approximation is valid . we present asymptotic models in the hele - shaw regime for flows of miscible fluids in a channel in the case where the bottom and the top of the channels have been modified in two different ways . the first case concerns a flat bottom with slip boundary conditions obtained by chemical patterning . the second one is a non-flat bottom with a non-slipping surface . we derive in both cases 2.5D and 2D asymptotic models . we prove global well - posedness of the 2D model . we also prove that both approaches are asymptotically equivalent in the hele - shaw regime and we present direct 3D simulations showing that for passive mixing strategy , the hele - shaw approximation is not valid anymore . 
this article describes the use of capillary pressure to initiate and control the rate of spontaneous liquid - liquid flow through microfluidic channels . In contrast to flow driven by external pressure , flow driven by capillary pressure is dominated by interfacial phenomena and is exquisitely sensitive to the chemical composition and geometry of the fluids and channels . A stepwise change in capillary force was initiated on a hydrophobic SlipChip by slipping a shallow channel containing an aqueous droplet into contact with a slightly deeper channel filled with immiscible oil . this action induced spontaneous flow of the droplet into the deeper channel . A model predicting the rate of spontaneous flow was developed on the basis of the balance of net capillary force with viscous flow resistance , using as inputs the liquid - liquid surface tension , the advancing and receding contact angles at the three - phase aqueous - oil - surface contact line , and the geometry of the devices . the impact of contact angle hysteresis , the presence or absence of a lubricating oil layer , and adsorption of surface - active compounds at liquid - liquid or liquid - solid interfaces were quantified . two regimes of flow spanning a <nUm> 4-fold range of flow rates were obtained and modeled quantitatively , with faster ( mm / s ) flow obtained when oil could escape through connected channels as it was displaced by flowing aqueous solution , and slower ( micrometer / s ) flow obtained when oil escape was mostly restricted to a micrometer - scale gap between the plates of the SlipChip ( " dead - end flow " ) . rupture of the lubricating oil layer ( reminiscent of a cassie - wenzel transition ) was proposed as a cause of discrepancy between the model and the experiment . both dilute salt solutions and complex biological solutions such as human blood plasma could be flowed using this approach . we anticipate that flow driven by capillary pressure will be useful for the design and operation of flow in microfluidic applications that do not require external power , valves , or pumps , including on SlipChip and other droplet- or plug - based microfluidic devices . In addition , this approach may be used as a sensitive method of evaluating interfacial tension , contact angles , and wetting phenomena on chip . 
this article presents a three - dimensional analytical model to investigate cross-stream diffusion transport in rectangular microchannels with arbitrary aspect ratios under pressure - driven flow . the fourier series solution to the three - dimensional convection - diffusion equation is obtained using a double integral transformation method and associated eigensystem calculation . A phase diagram derived from the dimensional analysis is presented to thoroughly interrogate the characteristics in various transport regimes and examine the validity of the model . the analytical model is verified against both experimental and numerical models in terms of the concentration profile , diffusion scaling law , and mixing efficiency with excellent agreement ( with < <nUm> % relative error ) . quantitative comparison against other prior analytical models in extensive parameter space is also performed , which demonstrates that the present model accommodates much broader transport regimes with significantly enhanced applicability . 
this is the first part of a two - part study on the generation of droplets at a microfluidic t-junction operating in the transition regime where confinement of the droplet creates a large squeezing pressure that influences droplet formation . In this regime , the operation of the t-junction depends on the geometry of the intersection ( height - to - width ratio , inlet width ratio ) , capillary number , flow ratio , and viscosity ratio of the two phases . here in paper I we presented our experimental observations through the analysis of high - speed videos of the droplet formation process . various parameters are tracked during the formation cycle such as the shape of the droplet ( penetration depth and neck ) , interdroplet spacing , production rate , and flow of both phases across several t-junction designs and flow conditions . generally , the formation process is defined by a two - stage model consisting of an initial filling stage followed by a necking stage . however , video evidence suggests the inclusion of a third stage , which we term the lag stage , at the beginning of the formation process that accounts for the retraction of the interface back into the injection channel after detachment . based on the observations made in this paper , a model is developed to describe the formation process in paper II , which can be used to understand the design and operation of t-junction generators in the transition regime . 
deterministic ratchets were evaluated in this study as continuous separation devices for suspensions . compared to conventional microfluidic ratchets ( gap width ≈ <nUm> . mm ) , ratchet designs in this study were <nUm> times larger . apart from the hydrodynamic regime ( <nUm> < . Re < <nUm> versus Re < <nUm> ) no other changes were introduced . three deterministic ratchet designs were constructed and evaluated for their separation efficiency with polystyrene particles having sizes between <nUm> and 532. mm . the separation efficiency was defined as the ratio between the highest and the lowest outlet concentration.The separation efficiency increased with increasing flow rate from a ratio of <nUm> ( Re = <nUm> ) at the lowest flow rates up to a ratio of <nUm> at the highest flow rates ( Re = <nUm> ) . an explanation for this strong dependence on flow rate may be the presence of inertial lift forces and a pair of vortices behind the obstacles ( typically for Re > <nUm> ) , which lead to additional displacement . furthermore , there was a maximum concentration of particles in the device above which the separation decreased , e.g. , 12. v / v % for a design with cylindrical-shaped obstacles . the high suspension concentrations did not lead to blockage of the device and were much higher compared to concentrations normally achieved for membrane separations.The up - scaled deterministic ratchets show potential for fractionation . particles above a critical particle size were better separated than particles below that critical particle size . 
go with the ( segmented ) flow : A gas - liquid microfluidic reactor system has been developed to study Pd - catalyzed carbonylation reactions over a range of flow regimes and reaction conditions ( see picture ) . the segmented gas - liquid flow regime , in comparison to annular flow , enables reactions to be studied over longer reaction times and without the buildup of unwanted Pd particles . 
the oscillatory couette flow between a stationary inner cylinder and an oscillating outer cylinder or a stationary outer cylinder and an oscillating inner cylinder is numerically investigated by using a continuum model with temperature - dependent transport coefficients based on the NavierStokes equations for compressible fluid , completed with the equations of continuity and energy transport . the first order velocity - slip boundary conditions , imposed at the outer cylinder wall , are linked to two types of motion of the outer cylinderharmonic oscillations and stepwise oscillations . the first order slip conditions are also imposed at the inner cylinder combined with two types of energy transfer at the gaswall interface . the first one is related to a constant wall temperature and the second one to an adiabatically isolated cylinder . thus , the capabilities of model and numerical solution are extended to some cases , which might be important from a practical viewpoint . calculated results for density , velocity , pressure and temperature variation are presented . the spectral characteristics of the gas flow oscillations in some interesting cases are analyzed . the numerical calculations for the case of harmonically oscillating inner cylinder are compared with the available analytical solution for incompressible viscous fluid and direct simulation monte carlo ( DSMC ) data . it is shown that for low speed oscillations the model of compressible viscous gas gives almost equivalent to incompressible fluid model solution for the macroscopic velocity profiles . At the same time noticeable temperature variations in the gas flow are observed that should be taken into consideration when the heat transfer in such a microfluidic system is analyzed . the presented results are interesting when non-planar microfluidic problems are considered . 
this paper demonstrates the application of ultrashort - pulsed lasers as a unique tool for controllable modification of the surface wettability of polymers from high hydrophilicity to superhydrophobicity . this is achieved by exploiting the effect of laser pulse duration and photon energy on the surface chemistry and morphology and subsequent wetting properties of polymeric surfaces treated with UV laser pulses . In three different pulse duration regimes , ranging from femtosecond to nanosecond and two different photon wavelengths , we have systematically altered the wettability of polyethersulfone surfaces from highly hydrophilic to superhydrophobic . our results indicate that , despite the remarkable changes in the surface morphology attained , the surface wettability variations are dominantly caused by laser - induced chemical modifications , which are highly dependent on the pulse energy and duration . the ability of tuning the wetting properties and thus the surface energy of laser - treated polymer surfaces within a broad range makes them excellent candidates for liquid flow control in microfluidics and biological adhesion applications . 
through a careful consideration of the retention ratio for field - flow fractionation ( FFF ) , we show that a single unified ideal retention theory can predict a wide range of separation behaviours including hydrodynamic chromatography , normal - mode FFF and steric - mode FFF by introducing the concept of a device retention parameter . we determine the critical device retention parameter above which normal - mode does not exist and there is no clear distinction between hydrodynamic chromatography and steric - mode FFF . numerical analysis of the elution order as a function of particle size quantitatively predicts the transitions between these regimes . the resulting map of the operational - modes shows each of the regions and their connectivity , and so may guide future device design . by extending this analysis to account for the variation of stress over particle surfaces , a hitherto unreported regime called faxen - mode FFF is predicted , which has the same elution order as normal - mode FFF . this mode arises when particle sizes approach the channel height , as can occur when microfluidic devices are utilized for FFF . the transition from steric - mode to faxen - mode FFF is numerically mapped and approximations for each transition are presented . 
A novel micropumping mechanism based on a theoretical model that describes flow transport in a microchannel induced by moving wall contractions in the low reynolds number flow regime is presented . the channel is assumed to have a length that is much greater than its width ( δ = W / L ≪ <nUm> ) and the upper wall is subjected to prescribed , non-peristaltic , localized moving contractions . lubrication theory for incompressible viscous flow at low reynolds number ( r e ∼ δ ) is used to model the problem mathematically and to derive expressions for the velocity components , pressure gradient , wall shear stress , and net flow produced by the wall contractions . the effect of contraction parameters such as amplitude and phase lag on the time - averaged net flow over a single cycle of wall motions is studied . the results presented here are supported by passive particle tracking simulations to investigate the possibility of using this system as a pumping mechanism . the present study is motivated by collapse mechanisms observed in entomological physiological systems that use multiple contractions to transport fluid , and the emerging novel microfluidic devices that mimic these systems . 
using quantitative flow visualization and a transparent microfluidic platform replicating the salient features of the cathode channel of a polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cell ( PEMFC ) , we investigate the dynamic evolution of water droplets emerging from a single <nUm> mm pore of a gas diffusion layer ( GDL ) into a <nUm> mm × <nUm> mm air channel . the flow regimes are found to be primarily dependent on the air flow reynolds numbers which ranged from <nUm> to <nUm> . At low Re , slug flow blocks the air flow through the channel . At higher Re , a periodic pattern of droplet emergence , growth and detachment appears . further increase in air velocity induce wavy water film pattern . the characteristic frequencies and a flow map of the flow regimes as a function of superficial air and water velocities and presented . the significantly higher critical air velocities compared to previous results in the literature highlight the important impact of pore connectivity . three different phases are identified in the dynamic evolution of the contact angles in the droplet regime . both advancing and receding angles initially increase at the same rate ; in the next phase only the advancing angle increases ; and finally both angles increase monotonically under the combined effect of pressure and shear forces , resulting in a maximum hysteresis of ∼ <nUm> ° . A decrease in the droplet aspect ratio ( height to chord ratio ) and contact angle hysteresis is observed in the film flow regime , and is found to reduce water removal capacity . 
immunomagnetic isolation and magnetophoresis in microfluidics have emerged as viable techniques for the separation , fractionation , and enrichment of rare cells . here we present the development and characterization of a microfluidic system that incorporates an angled permanent magnet for the lateral magnetophoresis of superparamagnetic beads and labeled cell - bead complexes . A numerical model , based on the relevant transport processes , is developed as a design tool for the demonstration and prediction of magnetophoretic displacement . we employ a dimensionless magnetophoresis parameter to efficiently investigate the design space , gain insight into the physics of the system , and compare results across the vast spectrum of magnetophoretic microfluidic systems . the numerical model and theoretical analysis are experimentally validated by the lateral magnetophoretic deflection of superparamagnetic beads and magnetically labeled breast adenocarcinoma MCF-7 cells in a microfluidic device that incorporates a permanent magnet angled relative to the flow . through the dimensionless magnetophoresis parameter , the transition between regimes of magnetophoretic action , from hydrodynamically dominated ( magnetic deflection ) to magnetically dominated ( magnetic capture ) , is experimentally identified . this powerful tool and theoretical framework enables efficient device and experiment design of biologically relevant systems , taking into account their inherent variability and labeling distributions . this analysis identifies the necessary beads , magnet configuration ( orientation ) , magnet type ( permanent , ferromagnetic , electromagnet ) , flow rate , channel geometry , and buffer to achieve the desired level of magnetophoretic deflection or capture . 
A thin flow - focusing microfluidic channel is evaluated for generating monodisperse liquid droplets . the microfluidic device is used in its native state , which is hydrophilic , or treated with OTS to make it hydrophobic . having both hydrophilic and hydrophobic surfaces allows for creation of both oil - in - water and water - in - oil emulsions , facilitating a large parameter study of viscosity ratios ( droplet fluid / continuous fluid ) ranging from <nUm> to <nUm> and flow rate ratios ( droplet fluid / continuous fluid ) ranging from <nUm> to <nUm> in one geometry . the hydrophilic chip provides a partially - wetting surface ( contact angle less than <nUm> ° ) for the inner fluid . this surface , combined with the unusually thin channel height , promotes a flow regime where the inner fluid wets the top and bottom of the channel in the orifice and a stable jet is formed . through confocal microscopy , this fluid stabilization is shown to be highly influenced by the contact angle of the liquids in the channel . non-wetting jets undergo breakup and produce drops when the jet is comparable to or smaller than the channel thickness . In contrast , partially - wetting jets undergo breakup only when they are much smaller than the channel thickness . drop sizes are found to scale with a modified capillary number based on the total flow rate regardless of wetting behavior . 
achievement of efficient mixing in microfluidic systems appears to be a highly challenging proposition , as attributable to typical low reynolds number hydrodynamics over small scales . to circumvent these constraints , numerous strategies , either relying upon a modulation in the microchannel geometry or involving active flow perturbations have been proposed in the literature . however , while the geometric or passive means suffer from a lack of dynamic control on the mixing process , the active methods can be unfavorably energy expensive . here we show that the problem of controllability and energy efficiency can be optimized to a large extent by combining the active and passive strategies within an integrated microfluidic platform , in the form of serpentine microchannel geometry with embedded electrodes . we demonstrate , both theoretically and experimentally , that in specific operating regimes , the mixing effectiveness ( expressed in terms of a quantifiable index ) of the designed system can be nontrivially higher than the algebraic sum of effectivenesses realized from pure active and passive mixing configurations , leading to a nonlinear amplification in the separation efficiency . results of our experiments may be used a generic design principle for optimized mixing performance of lab - on - a - chip microdevices , with a judicious combination of the active and passive mixing paradigms . 
with the rise in popularity of biological small - angle x-ray scattering ( BioSAXS ) measurements , synchrotron beamlines are confronted with an ever - increasing number of samples from a wide range of solution conditions . to meet these demands , an increasing number of beamlines worldwide have begun to provide automated liquid - handling systems for sample loading . this article presents an automated sample - loading system for BioSAXS beamlines , which combines single - channel disposable - tip pipetting with a vacuum - enclosed temperature - controlled capillary flow cell . the design incorporates an easily changeable capillary to reduce the incidence of x-ray window fouling and cross contamination . both the robot - control and the data - processing systems are written in python . the data - processing code , RAW , has been enhanced with several new features to form a user - friendly BioSAXS pipeline for the robot . the flow cell also supports efficient manual loading and sample recovery . an effective rinse protocol for the sample cell is developed and tested . fluid dynamics within the sample capillary reveals a vortex ring pattern of circulation that redistributes radiation - damaged material . radiation damage is most severe in the boundary layer near the capillary surface . At typical flow speeds , capillaries below <nUm> mm in diameter are beginning to enter the stokes ( creeping flow ) regime in which mixing due to oscillation is limited . analysis within this regime shows that single - pass exposure and multiple - pass exposure of a sample plug are functionally the same with regard to exposed volume when plug motion reversal is slow . the robot was tested on three different beamlines at the cornell high - energy synchrotron source , with a variety of detectors and beam characteristics , and it has been used successfully in several published studies as well as in two introductory short courses on basic BioSAXS methods . 
A dual lab on a chip ( DLOC ) approach that enables simultaneous optical and electrochemical detection working in a continuous flow regime is presented . both detection modes are integrated for the first time into a single detection volume and operate simultaneously with no evidence of cross-talk . the electrochemical cell was characterized amperometrically by measuring the current in ferrocyanide solutions at + <nUm> V vs gold pseudoreference electrode , at a flow rate of <nUm> mL min <nUm> . the experimental results for ferrocyanide concentrations ranging from <nUm> to <nUm> mM were in good agreement with the values predicted by the levich equation for a microelectrode inside a rectangular channel , with a sensitivity of <nUm> ± <nUm> mA mM <nUm> and a limit of detection ( LoD ) of ( <nUm> ± <nUm> ) × <nUm> <nUm> mM . besides , optical detection was evaluated by measuring the absorbance of ferricyanide solutions at <nUm> nm . the results obtained therein coincide with those predicted by the beer - lambert law for a range of ferricyanide concentrations from <nUm> to <nUm> mM and showed an estimated LoD of ( <nUm> ± <nUm> ) × <nUm> <nUm> mM . the DLOC was finally applied to the analysis of l-lactate via a bienzymatic reaction involving lactate oxidase ( LOX ) and horseradish peroxidase ( HRP ) . here , the consumption of the reagent of the reaction ( ferrocyanide ) was continuously monitored by amperometry whereas the product of the reaction ( ferricyanide ) was recorded by absorbance . the DLOC presented good performance in terms of sensitivity and limit of detection , comparable to other fluidic systems found in the literature . additionally , the ability to simultaneously quantify enzymatic reagent consumption and product generation confers the DLOC a self - verifying capability which in turn enhances its robustness and reliability . 
In microducts deviation from continuum flow behaviour of a gas increases with rarefaction . when using navier - stokes equations to calculate a flow under slightly and moderately rarefied conditions , slip boundary conditions are used which in turn refer to the tangential momentum accommodation coefficient ( TMAC ) . here we demonstrate that , in the so - called slip and transition regime , the flow in microducts can be reliably described by a consistently non-empirical model without considering the TMAC . we obtain this equation by superposition of convective transport and fickian diffusion using two - dimensional solutions of navier - stokes equations and a description for the knudsen diffusion coefficient as derived from kinetic theory respectively . for a wide variety of measurement series found in the literature the calculation predicts the data accurately . surprisingly only size of the duct , temperature , gas properties and inlet and outlet pressure are necessary to calculate the resulting mass flow by means of a single algebraic equation . from this , and taking the discrepancies of the TMAC concerning surface roughness and nature of the gases into account , we could conclude that neither the diffusive proportions nor the total mass flow rates are influenced by surface topology and chemistry at knudsen numbers below unity . compared to the tube geometry , the model slightly underestimates the flow rate in rectangular channels when rarefaction increases . likewise , the dimensionless mass flow rate and the diffusive proportion of the total flow are distinctly higher in a tube . thus the cross-sectional geometry has a significant influence on the transport mechanisms under rarefied conditions . 
the aim of this work was to quantify the performance of two well - known mixing mechanisms used in microreactors : the split - and - recombination ( SAR ) and the multilamination by means of an interdigital structure . the residence time distribution ( RTD ) and the mixing performance in laminar flow regime were experimentally characterized by the tracer pulse - input technique and the iodide - iodate villermaux / dushman method . RTD analysis indicates bypassing caused by uneven flow distribution in the manifolds of both microreactors . A decrease of the quadratic dependence of axial dispersion on fluid velocity is produced by the improved tracer homogenization achieved in the microfluidic structures . the iodide - iodate method shows that below a critical damkohler number the microreactors exhibit a superior mixing performance than a conventional t-junction . the interdigital microreactor displayed the best mixing capabilities for all the flow conditions investigated . however , the estimation of energy dissipation confirms that the improved mixing performance of the interdigital unit is obtained at the expense of greater energy expenditure when compared with the split - and - recombination microreactor . 
this paper presents a new type of passive microfluidic mixer called the " h-micromixer " . this type of passive micromixer is based on the splitting and recombination ( SAR ) process , meaning that the two fluids to be mixed are split and recombined to optimize the diffusion process . the paper also describes an experimental investigation of the mixing process in three different geometries : t-micromixer , o-micromixer and h-micromixer . the laminar flow regime ( <nUm> < Re < <nUm> ) was considered during tests and image - based techniques were used to evaluate mixing efficiency . At all tested flow rates , experimental data show that the h-micromixer is more efficient than the other tested microdevices . the h-micromixer 's efficiency is very high due to the SAR process : specifically , efficiency up to <nUm> % can be achieved at Re = <nUm> . 
four - channel flow - through electrochemical cell working in thin - layer regime was designed , fabricated and characterized experimentally and in computational fluid dynamics ( CFD ) simulations . the new principle of operation allows reproducible splitting of a stream of liquid into multiple flow channels . systems comprising of 2- , 3- , 4- and 8-channels were tested . the proper function of the cell is given by the ratio of the cross-sections of the fluidic element collecting chamber and the particular flow paths among which the liquid is distributed . suitable flow rates providing uniform liquid distribution were evaluated and the results were compared to CFD modeling . the flow - through cells designed according to the proposed principle can be simply incorporated in automated routine analysis as only one inlet and one common outlet are required . 
we report a microfluidic approach , which allows selective and controlled <nUm> : <nUm> , <nUm> : <nUm> or <nUm> : <nUm> droplet fusion . A surfactant - stabilized droplet with an interfacial surfactant coverage , γ , of > <nUm> % will fuse spontaneously with a second droplet when γ of the latter droplet is < <nUm> % . however , when γ of the second droplet is ∼ <nUm> % , the two droplets will not fuse , unless they have previously been brought into contact for critical time τ . therefore , controlling the number of droplets in contact for time τ allows precise control over the number of fused droplets . we have demonstrated efficient ( proportion of droplets coalesced p(c) = <nUm> , n > <nUm> ) and selective <nUm> : <nUm> , <nUm> : <nUm> or <nUm> : <nUm> droplet fusion ( proportion of correctly fused droplets p ( s ) > <nUm> , n > <nUm> ) . coalescence in this regime is induced by hydrodynamic flow causing interface separation and is efficient at different Ca numbers and using different dispersed phases , continuous phases and surfactants . however , when γ of the second droplet is ∼ <nUm> % coalescence is no longer observed . droplet - based microfluidic systems , in which each droplet functions as an independent microreactor , are proving a promising tool for a wide range of ultrahigh - throughput applications in biology and chemistry . the addition of new reagents to pre-formed droplets is critical to many of these applications and we believe the system described here is a simple and flexible method to do so , as well as a new tool to study interfacial stability phenomena . 
the process by which a protein folds into its native conformation is highly relevant to biology and human health yet still poorly understood . one reason for this is that folding takes place over a wide range of timescales , from nanoseconds to seconds or longer , depending on the protein . conventional stopped - flow mixers have allowed measurement of folding kinetics starting at about <nUm> ms . we have recently developed a microfluidic mixer that dilutes denaturant ~ 100-fold in ~ <nUm> ms . unlike a stopped - flow mixer , this mixer operates in the laminar flow regime in which turbulence does not occur . the absence of turbulence allows precise numeric simulation of all flows within the mixer with excellent agreement to experiment . laminar flow is achieved for reynolds numbers Re ≤ <nUm> . for aqueous solutions , this requires micron scale geometries . we use a hard substrate , such as silicon or fused silica , to make channels 5-10 mm wide and <nUm> mm deep ( see figure <nUm> ) . the smallest dimensions , at the entrance to the mixing region , are on the order of <nUm> mm in size . the chip is sealed with a thin glass or fused silica coverslip for optical access . typical total linear flow rates are ~ <nUm> m / s , yielding Re ~ <nUm> , but the protein consumption is only ~ <nUm> nL / s or <nUm> mL / hr . protein concentration depends on the detection method : for tryptophan fluorescence the typical concentration is <nUm> mM ( for <nUm> trp / protein ) and for FRET the typical concentration is ~ <nUm> nM . the folding process is initiated by rapid dilution of denaturant from <nUm> m to <nUm> m guanidine hydrochloride . the protein in high denaturant flows down a central channel and is met on either side at the mixing region by buffer without denaturant moving ~ <nUm> times faster ( see figure <nUm> ) . this geometry causes rapid constriction of the protein flow into a narrow jet ~ <nUm> nm wide . diffusion of the light denaturant molecules is very rapid , while diffusion of the heavy protein molecules is much slower , diffusing less than <nUm> mm in <nUm> ms . the difference in diffusion constant of the denaturant and the protein results in rapid dilution of the denaturant from the protein stream , reducing the effective concentration of the denaturant around the protein . the protein jet flows at a constant rate down the observation channel and fluorescence of the protein during folding can be observed using a scanning confocal microscope . 
A confined impinging jet mixing device has been used to investigate the continuous sunflower oil / water emulsification process under turbulent flow conditions with oil contents between <nUm> % ( v / v ) and <nUm> % ( v / v ) . various emulsifiers ( tween20 , span80 , whey protein , lecithin and sodium dodecylsulphate ) varying in molecular weights have been studied . mean droplet sizes varied with the emulsifiers used and smallest droplets were obtained under fully turbulent flow regime , i.e. at the highest jet flow rate and highest jet reynolds number conditions . sodium dodecylsulfate ( SDS ) produced droplets in the range of <nUm> mm while <nUm> mm droplets were obtained with whey protein . similar droplet sizes were obtained under fully turbulent flow conditions ( 610. mL / min ; reynolds number = <nUm> ) for oil content varying between <nUm> % ( v / v ) and <nUm> % ( v / v ) . to investigate the smallest droplet size possible in the device , the emulsion was passed through the geometry multiple times . multi-pass emulsification resulted in reduction in droplet size indicating that longer residence in the flow field under high shear condition allowed for breakage of droplets as well as the time for the emulsifier to stabilize the newly formed droplets , decreasing the impact of coalescence . this was confirmed by timescale analysis of the involved process steps for the droplet data obtained via experiments . dependence of mean droplet size on the o / w interfacial tension and peak energy dissipation was also investigated . 
In this work , an experimental investigation of the single- and multiphase flows of two sets of fluids , CO 2-ethanol and CO 2-methanol , in a non-adiabatic microfluidic t-junction is presented . the operating conditions ranged from <nUm> to <nUm> MPa , and from <nUm> to <nUm> K . the feed mass fraction of CO <nUm> in the mixtures was <nUm> and <nUm> , respectively . under these operating conditions , CO <nUm> was either in liquid , gas or supercritical state ; and the mixtures experienced a miscible single phase or a vapour - liquid equilibrium ( VLE ) , with two separated phases . taylor , annular and wavy were the two - phase flow regimes obtained in the VLE region . In the single phase region , the observed flows were classified into standard single - phase flows , " pseudo " two - phase flows and local phenomena in the t-junction . flow regime maps were generated , based on temperature and pressure conditions . two - phase flow void fractions and several parameters of taylor flow were analysed . they showed a clear dependency on temperature , but were mostly insensitive to pressure . A continuous accumulation of liquid , either in the CO <nUm> channel or at the CO 2-side wall after the t-junction , disturbed most of the experiments in VLE conditions by randomly generating liquid plugs . this phenomenon is analysed , and capillary and wetting effects due to local marangoni stresses are suggested as possible causes . 
this paper presents a theoretical and computational investigation of convection , diffusion , and adsorption in surface - based biosensors . In particular , we study the transport dynamics in a model geometry of a surface plasmon resonance ( SPR ) sensor . the work , however , is equally relevant for other microfluidic surface - based biosensors , operating under flow conditions . A widely adopted approximate quasi-steady theory to capture convective and diffusive mass transport is reviewed , and an analytical solution is presented . an expression of the damkohler number is derived in terms of the nondimensional adsorption coefficient ( biot number ) , the nondimensional flow rate ( peclet number ) , and the model geometry . transient dynamics is investigated , and we quantify the error of using the quasi-steady-state assumption for experimental data fitting in both kinetically limited and convection - diffusion - limited regimes for irreversible adsorption , in specific . the results clarify the conditions under which the quasi-steady theory is reliable or not . In extension to the well - known fact that the range of validity is altered under convection - diffusion - limited conditions , we show how also the ratio of the inlet concentration to the maximum surface capacity is critical for reliable use of the quasi-steady theory . finally , our results provide users of surface - based biosensors with a tool for correcting experimentally obtained adsorption rate constants . 
the performances of a single microband electrode probing within a microfluidic channel , the passage of a concentration front of electroactive species,were investigated . optimal conditions in terms of device geometries and hydrodynamic flow were delineated to allowamperometric detectionswith high temporal resolution . these conditions correspond to specific regimes reflecting the complex coupling between diffusional and convective transport . experimental current responses were in excellent agreement with the theoretical predictions . A new concept of microchannel electrodes acting as concentration probes was thus successfully demonstrated . 
we propose a method to separate enantiomers in microfluidic or nanofluidic channels . it requires flow profiles that break chiral symmetry and have regions with high local shear . such profiles can be generated in channels confined by walls with different hydrodynamic boundary conditions ( e.g. , slip lengths ) . because of a nonlinear hydrodynamic effect , particles with different chirality migrate at different speeds and can be separated . the mechanism is demonstrated by computer simulations . we investigate the influence of thermal fluctuations ( i.e. , the peclet number ) and show that the effect disappears in the linear response regime . the details of the microscopic flow are important and determine which volume forces are necessary to achieve separation . 

we have previously demonstrated a resonant microwave measurement technique optimised for highly accurate , nondestructive and label - free liquid - phase dielectric spectroscopy [1] . this was successfully integrated into a microfluidic platform [2] for in situ , non-invasive and real - time measurements . here we report major enhancements in the microfluidic functionality in order to demonstrate the flexibility and usefulness of the measurement platform . we present some further results , discuss the enabling aspects of such an approach and consider the relevance to , and applications within , chemical and biochemical analysis . In hitherto unattempted experiments , single - phase concentration measurements of solvent - solvent and solute - solvent systems have been used to investigate limits of detection , whilst the suitability of this technique to multi-phase and digital microfluidic regimes have been demonstrated with segmented - flow measurements . 
tumors are heterogeneous masses of cells characterized pathologically by their size and spread . their chaotic biology makes treatment of malignancies hard to generalize . we present a robust and reproducible glass microfluidic system , for the maintenance and " interrogation " of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma ( HNSCC ) tumor biopsies , which enables continuous media perfusion and waste removal , recreating in vivo laminar flow and diffusion - driven conditions . primary HNSCC or metastatic lymph samples were subsequently treated with 5-fluorouracil and cisplatin , alone and in combination , and were monitored for viability and apoptotic biomarker release ' off - chip ' over <nUm> days . the concentration of lactate dehydrogenase was initially high but rapidly dropped to minimally detectable levels in all tumor samples ; conversely , effluent concentration of WST-1 ( cell proliferation ) increased over <nUm> days : both factors demonstrating cell viability . addition of cell lysis reagent resulted in increased cell death and reduction in cell proliferation . an apoptotic biomarker , cytochrome c , was analyzed and all the treated samples showed higher levels than the control , with the combination therapy showing the greatest effect . hematoxylin- and eosin - stained sections from the biopsy , before and after maintenance , demonstrated the preservation of tissue architecture . this device offers a novel method of studying the tumor environment , and offers a pre-clinical model for creating personalized treatment regimens . 
we describe and characterize a pumping mechanism that leverages the momentum present in small droplets ejected from a micro-nozzle to drive flow in an open microfluidic device . this approach allows driving flow in a microfluidic device in a regime that offers unique features different to those achievable with typical passive pumping or syringe - pump driven flow . two flow regimes with specific flow characteristics are described : inertia enhanced passive pumping , in which fluid exchange times in the channel are significantly reduced , and inertia actuated flow , in which it is possible to initiate flow in an empty channel or against natural pressure gradients . momentum is leveraged to create rapid fluid exchanges , instantaneous flow reversal , filling and mixing inside the microfluidic device . 
A microfluidic approach for the generation of perfluorocarbon nanodroplets as the primary emulsion with diameters as small as 300-400 nm is described . the system uses a pressure - controlled delivery of all reagents and increased viscosity in the continuous phase to drive the device into an advanced tip - streaming regime , which results in generation of droplets in the sub-micrometer range . such nanodroplets may be appropriate for emerging biomedical applications . 
In many important chemical processes , the laminar flow regime is inescapable and defines the performance of reactors , separators , and analytical instruments . In the emerging field of microchemical process or lab - on - a - chip , this constraint is particularly rigid . here , we review developments in the use of chaotic laminar flows to improve common transport processes in this regime . we focus on four : mixing , interfacial transfer , axial dispersion , and spatial sampling . our coverage demonstrates the potential for chaos to improve these processes if implemented appropriately . throughout , we emphasize the usefulness of familiar theoretical models of transport for processes occurring in chaotic flows . finally , we point out open challenges and opportunities in the field . 
we present the thermal analysis of liquid containing Al2O <nUm> nanoparticles in a microfluidic platform using an infrared camera . the small dimensions of the microchannel along with the low flow rates ( less than <nUm> ml min-1 ) provide very low reynolds numbers of less than <nUm> , reflecting practical parameters for a microfluidic cooling platform . the heat analysis of nanofluids has never been investigated in such a regime , due to the deficiencies of conventional thermal measurement systems . the infrared camera allows non-contact , three dimensional and high resolution capability for temperature profiling . the system was studied at different w / w concentrations of thermally conductive Al2O3 nanoparticles and the experiments were in excellent agreement with the computational fluid dynamics ( CFD ) simulations . 
particle concentration is a key unit operation in biochemical assays . although there are many techniques for particle concentration in continuous - phase microfluidics , relatively few are available in multiphase ( plug - based ) microfluidics . existing approaches generally require external electric or magnetic fields together with charged or magnetized particles . this paper reports a passive technique for particle concentration in water - in - oil plugs which relies on the interaction between particle sedimentation and the recirculating vortices inherent to plug flow in a cylindrical capillary . this interaction can be quantified using the shields parameter ( θ ) , a dimensionless ratio of a particle 's drag force to its gravitational force , which scales with plug velocity . three regimes of particle behavior are identified . when θ is less than the movement threshold ( region I ) , particles sediment to the bottom of the plug where the internal vortices subsequently concentrate the particles at the rear of the plug . we demonstrate highly efficient concentration ( ~ <nUm> % ) of <nUm> mm glass beads in <nUm> mm diameter plugs traveling at velocities up to <nUm> mm / s . As θ is increased beyond the movement threshold ( region II ) , particles are suspended in well - defined circulation zones which begin at the rear of the plug . the length of the zone scales linearly with plug velocity , and at sufficiently large θ , it spans the length of the plug ( region III ) . A second effect , attributed to the co-rotating vortices at the rear cap , causes particle aggregation in the cap , regardless of flow velocity . region I is useful for concentrating / collecting particles , while the latter two are useful for mixing the beads with the solution . therefore , the two key steps of a bead - based assay , concentration and resuspension , can be achieved simply by changing the plug velocity . by exploiting an interaction of sedimentation and recirculation unique to multiphase flow , this simple technique achieves particle concentration without on - chip components , and could therefore be applied to a range of heterogeneous screening assays in discrete nl plugs . 
A new non-intrusive measurement technique for two - phase flow in microchannels is presented . the development of an evanescent field - based optical fiber bragg grating ( FBG ) sensor is described , and experiments coupled with flow visualization demonstrating the performance of this sensor are presented . two adjacent 1-mm FBGs in etched d-shaped fiber are embedded into the surface of a PDMS microchannel . experiments are conducted in both droplet and slug flow regimes and high - speed digital video is captured synchronously with the sensor data . the FBGs exhibit an on - off type response to the passage droplets which is shown to correlate precisely with the passage of the liquid phase . this correlation enables the measurement of droplet average velocity and size using only the sensor data . In addition to the use of both FBG signals for the purpose of measuring droplet speed and size , it is shown that for droplets larger than the FBG length , a single FBG can be used to estimate the convection velocity and size of fast moving droplets . this sensing method is potentially useful for monitoring two - phase flow in fuel cells and microfluidic applications such as micro-heat exchangers and lab - on - a - chip systems . 
to predict double - emulsion formation in a capillary microfluidic device , a ternary diffuse - interface model is presented . the formation of double emulsions involves complex interfacial phenomena of a three - phase fluid system , where each component can have different physical properties . we use the navier - stokes / cahn - hilliard model for a general ternary system , where the hydrodynamics is coupled with the thermodynamics of the phase field variables . our model predicts important features of the double - emulsion formation which was observed experimentally by utada et al. [ utada et al. , science , <nUm> , <nUm> , <nUm> ] . In particular , our model predicts both the dripping and jetting regimes as well as the transition between those two regimes by changing the flow rate conditions . we also demonstrate that a double emulsion having multiple inner drops can be formed when the outer interface is more stable than the inner interface . 
deterministic lateral displacement ( DLD ) has been recently proposed as a simple and efficient method to separate a polydisperse mixture of particles based on particle size . the separation device consists of a shallow rectangular channel filled with a periodic lattice of micrometer - sized obstacles , whose principal direction forms an angle with the channel walls . particles are dragged by a carrier flow stream through the device . experiments have shown that particles larger than a critical size depart from the average direction of the carrier flow , as they are systematically deflected by the obstacles while being dragged downstream . theoretical models based on the geometric structure of the stokes flow through the obstacle lattice have been proposed to predict the average direction of particle current flux . besides , little is known about the dispersion of diffusing particles about the average particle current . In this article , we show that the interaction between the deterministic and stochastic components of particle motion results in a large - scale , possibly anisotropic , convection - enhanced dispersion process , which may hinder separation far beyond what could be predicted from the value of the bare particle diffusivity . the prediction of dispersion regimes results therefore essential for an optimal design of DLD devices . 
fluid flow phenomena in the stokesian regime abounds in nature as well as in microfluidic applications . discretizations based on boundary integral formulations for such flow problems allow for a reduction in dimensionality but have to deal with dense matrices and the numerical evaluation of integrals with singular kernels . the focus of this paper is the discretization of wall confinements , and specifically the numerical treatment of flat solid boundaries ( walls ) , for which a set of high - order quadrature rules that accurately integrate the singular kernel of the stokes equations are developed . discretizing by nystrom 's method , the accuracy of the numerical integration determines the accuracy of the solution of the boundary integral equations , and a higher order quadrature method yields a large gain in accuracy at negligible cost . the structure of the resulting submatrix associated with each wall is exploited in order to substantially reduce the memory usage . the expected convergence of the quadrature rules is validated through numerical tests , and this boundary treatment is further applied to the classical problem of a sedimenting sphere in the vicinity of solid walls . 
by just applying a temperature difference to a micro-system filled with rarefied gas , it is possible to engender a displacement or a compression of the gas in the temperature gradient direction . this is the thermal transpiration phenomenon . In the present work , thermal transpiration has been studied both through an experimental approach , which exploits an original measuring system , and through a numerical approach , which is modeled on the basis of the shakhov model kinetic equation . In both studies , a circular cross section glass micro-tube is submitted to a temperature gradient . the obtained results for helium , such as the thermal molecular pressure difference , the thermal molecular pressure ratio and the thermal molecular pressure exponent at the final zero - flow stage , are analyzed in the case of a tube submitted to a temperature difference of <nUm> K . finally , the obtained thermal molecular pressure ratio results are also compared to the semi-empirical formulas of liang ( 1951 ) and takaishi and sensui ( 1963 ) . these semi-empirical formulas are still in use nowadays to introduce correction factors for pressure measurements done when the pressure gauge functions at different temperatures in respect to the temperature of the operating gas . for the here working pressure conditions and the used tube dimensions the gas rarefaction conditions go from near free molecular to slip regime . 
this study extends our previous work on droplet generation in microfluidic t-junction generators to include dynamic interfacial tension effects created by the presence of surfactants . In paper I , we presented experimental findings regarding the formation process in the squeezing - to - transition regime , and in paper II we developed a theoretical model that describes the performance of t-junction generators without surfactants . here we study dynamic interfacial tension effects for two surfactants , one with a small molecular weight that adsorbs quickly , and the other with a large molecular weight that adsorbs slowly . using the force balance developed in paper II we extract the dynamic interfacial tension from high speed videos obtained during experiments . we then develop a theoretical model to predict the dynamic interfacial tension in microfluidic t-junction generators as a function of the surfactant properties , flow conditions , and generator design . this model is then incorporated into the overall model for generator performance to effectively predict the size of droplets produced when surfactants are present . 
the production of uniform sized and multilayer microbubbles enables promising medical applications that combine ultrasound contrast and targeted delivery of therapeutics , with improvements in the consistency of acoustic response and drug loading relative to non-uniform populations of microbubbles . microfluidics has shown utility in the generation of such small multiphase systems ; however , low production rates from individual devices limit the potential for clinical translation . we present scaled-up production of monodisperse dual layered microbubbles in a novel multi-array microfluidic module containing four or eight hydrodynamic flow focusing orifices . production reached 1*34 × <nUm> <nUm> Hz in the eight - channel configuration , and microbubble diameters in the high speed regime ( > <nUm> × <nUm> <nUm> Hz ) ranged 18*6 - 22*3 mm with a mean pooled polydispersity index under <nUm> % . results demonstrate that microfluidic scale-up for high output production of multilayer bubbles is possible while maintaining consistency in size production , suggesting that this method may be appropriate for future clinical applications . 
one way to potentially modify the performance of field - flow fractionation ( FFF ) would be to move the position of the maximum flow velocity away from the mid-point of the channel , for example by using walls with non-zero slip lengths . In this short communication , we extend the ideal theory of FFF to include the effects of two slip walls . our calculations demonstrate that while the hydrodynamic chromatography limit of FFF ( weak fields ) is not improved by engineering devices with slip - walls , the performance of normal - mode FFF can be enhanced by having slip at the depletion wall in moderate fields . we also introduce a new regime , which we call slip - mode FFF , where a large external field ( typical of normal - mode FFF ) and a large slip at the accumulation wall lead to sharp separations characterized by an elution order that is similar to that of hydrodynamic chromatography . 
we study numerically the dynamics of jets and drops in a microcapillary co-flow device . the co-flow stream encounters different flow regimes , including dripping , jetting . using a level - set / finite element axysimmetric numerical simulation , we study the dynamics of breakup of a jet subject to flow rate perturbations . A scaling law for the width of the unperturbed jet is presented and compared to existing experimental results as well as numerical measurements . then , we show that the introduction of a sinusoidal perturbation of the inner fluid flow rate can facilitate breakup of the fluid in regimes where a jet is usually observed . moreover , the flow rate perturbation leads to a good control over the size and the frequency of the resulting droplets . using theoretical modelling , we provide a criterion to determine the optimal frequency to break up the jet . we also derive scaling laws to determine the volume of inner fluid encapsulated in the emulsion droplets as a function of the frequency and to estimate the distance for the jet to break up as a function of the amplitude of perturbation . these scaling laws are in good agreement with results of numerical simulations . our work suggests a novel approach and offers guiding principles to break up liquid jets in cases where dripping is difficult to achieve . 
here we present a model and an experimental investigation to study cell bound to the floor of a microfluidic system and the flow induced detachment . the experimental investigation has been performed by a microfluidic assay biofunctionalized with specific antibodies . the upregulation of the cell membrane density of specific antigens has been exploited to detect and concentrate cells using hydrodynamic forces . the numerical model explored the role that the hydrodynamic forces have on adhesion - detachment of cell to the biofunctionalized substrate . to account the adhesion force , the cell receptor - surface ligand interaction has been represented by a linear spring exerting adhesive force on the target cell . the experimental investigation with the W6 / <nUm> , an antibody that binds specifically to MHC class I molecule and which has an important role in the recognition of the tumor cells from the immune system , has been simulated by the numerical model with a constant spring K s = <nUm> × <nUm> <nUm> N / s . the velocity of cells and of the fluid and the experimental capture yield have been compared . the existence of three different regimes of cell behavior has been shown , moving from firm adhesion to free rolling . up to <nUm> ml / s the cells experience the adherent rolling , whilst at higher flow rate the cells start to move with the fluid in a regime of free rolling . the model provides physical insight , explaining apparently counterintuitive features of the prototype assay data . 
flow in unsaturated porous media or in engineered microfluidic systems is dominated by capillary and viscous forces . consequently , flow regimes may differ markedly from conventional flows , reflecting strong interfacial influences on small bodies of flowing liquids . In this work , we visualized liquid transport patterns in open capillary channels with a range of opening sizes from <nUm> to <nUm> mm using laser scanning confocal microscopy combined with fluorescent latex particles ( <nUm> mm ) as tracers at a mean velocity of ∼ <nUm> mm s <nUm> . the observed velocity profiles indicate limited mobility at the air water interface . the application of the stokes equation with mixed boundary conditions ( i.e. , no slip on the channel walls and partial slip or shear stress at the air water interface ) clearly illustrates the increasing importance of interfacial shear stress with decreasing channel size . interfacial shear stress emerges from the velocity gradient from the adjoining no - slip walls to the center where flow is trapped in a region in which capillary forces dominate . In addition , the increased contribution of capillary forces ( relative to viscous forces ) to flow on the microscale leads to increased interfacial curvature , which , together with interfacial shear stress , affects the velocity distribution and flow pattern ( e.g. , reverse flow in the contact line region ) . we found that partial slip , rather than the commonly used stress - free condition , provided a more accurate description of the boundary condition at the confined air water interface , reflecting the key role that surface / interface effects play in controlling flow behavior on the nanoscale and microscale . 
moderately rarefied gas flows are clearly distinguished from viscous flow in the continuum regime and from molecular diffusion at high rarefaction . they are an intermediate of the two border cases referred to as slip flow and transition regime flow . here , we present a new pencil - and - paper approach for modeling flows in these regimes by a superposition of convection and fickian diffusion . it allows us to predict mass flows for helium , argon , nitrogencarbon dioxide in microducts with parallel walls and with slightly varying cross section . the model was validated by measurement series taken from literature and by own permeation experiments on tapered microchannels . analytical investigation of the approach showed that the diffusive flow is proportional to the cross-sectional area at the channel entrance . hence , the mass flow in a tapered channel is unequal in both directions when diffusion dominates due to increased rarefaction . In contrary to the common maxwellian slip approach the superposition model describes the data reliably . from this we conclude that deviations from continuum behavior in the intermediate can not be explained by slip flow at the walls and tangential momentum accommodation , but by fickian diffusion . now predictions are possible without any usage of fitted parameters such as the tangential momentum accommodation coefficient . 
this work presented a multi-component LBM approach to model the scalar mixing process with the chemical reactions in a liquid system . two - dimensional simulation was applied to investigate the enhancement of the mixing performance at the laminar flow regime with very low Re numbers . the mixing degree measured with both IOS ( intensity of segregation , characterized by the pure mixing without reaction ) and x S ( segregation index , characterized by the chemical reaction ) was used to quantify the mixing performance . the investigation in both pure mixing process and the reacting flow system showed that the flow - focusing effect with the simple geometry could significantly enhance the mixing as well as the subsequent chemical reactions at very low Re numbers . we expected the theoretical approach described in our study to provide an effective method for micro-device design and optimization . 
A time - resolved microPIV method is presented to measure in an EOF the particles zeta potential in situ during the transient start-up of a microdevice . the method resolves the electrophoretic velocity of fluoro-spheres used as tracer particles in microPIV . this approach exploits the short transient regime of the EOF generated after a potential drop is imposed across a microchannel and before reaching quasisteady state . during the starting of the transient regime , the electrophoretic effect is dominant in the center of the channel and the EOF is negligible . by measuring the velocity of the tracer particles with a microPIV system during that starting period , their electrophoretic velocity is obtained . the technique also resolves the temporal evolution of the EOF with three regions identified . the first region occurs before the electroosmotic effect reaches the center of the channel , the second region extends until the EOF reaches steady state , and thereafter is the third region . the two time constants separating these regions are also obtained and compared to the theory . the zeta potential of <nUm> nm diameter polystyrene particles is calculated for different solutions including borate buffer , sodium chloride , and deionized water . results show that the magnitudes of the electrophoretic and electroosmotic velocities are in the range of |300| to |700| mm / s for these measurements . the zeta potential values are compared to the well - established closed cell technique showing improved accuracy . the method also resolves the characteristic response time of the EOF , showing small but important deviations from current analytical predictions . additionally , the measurements can be performed in situ in microfluidic devices under actual working EOF conditions and without the need for calibrations . 
droplet formation and breakup dynamics in either dripping or jetting regimes in microfluidic flow - focusing devices were investigated experimentally . more viscous liquids were dispersed into less viscous liquids in square microchannels with <nUm> and 400. mm wide , respectively . In the dripping regime , for low viscosity ratio of both phases , the variation of the minimum width of the dispersed thread with the remaining time could be scaled as a power - law relationship with exponent related to initial conditions , and the droplet size could be correlated with the flow rate ratio of both phases and the capillary number of the continuous phase ; while for high viscosity ratio of both phases , the dispersed thread experiences a linear thinning procedure , and the droplet size can be scaled with the weber number of the continuous phase . In the jetting regime , the stable jet width was affected by the viscosity ratio and flow rate ratio of both phases . and the relationship between the droplet size and the flow rate ratio of both phases could be scaled as a power - law relation with the exponent dependent on the viscosity ratio of both phases . the analysis of the mode of the maximum instability of the oil jet indicated that the most unstable instability is related to the viscosity ratio of both phases and is almost independent on the flow rate ratio of both phases . 
monodisperse poly(dl - lactic acid ) ( PLA ) particles of diameters between <nUm> and <nUm> mm were fabricated in flow focusing glass microcapillary devices by evaporation of dichloromethane ( DCM ) from emulsion droplets at room temperature . the dispersed phase was <nUm> % ( w / w ) PLA in DCM containing 0.1-2 mM nile red and the continuous phase was <nUm> % ( w / w ) poly(vinyl alcohol ) in reverse osmosis water . particle diameter was <nUm> times smaller than the diameter of the emulsion droplet template , indicating very low particle porosity . monodisperse droplets have only been produced under dripping regime using a wide range of dispersed phase flow rates ( <nUm> - <nUm> cm3*h-1 ) , continuous phase flow rates ( 0.3-30 cm3*h-1 ) , and orifice diameters ( 50-237 mm ) . In the dripping regime , the ratio of droplet diameter to orifice diameter was inversely proportional to the <nUm> power of the ratio of the continuous phase flow rate to dispersed phase flow rate . highly uniform droplets with a coefficient of variation ( CV ) below <nUm> % and a ratio of the droplet diameter to orifice diameter of 0.5-1 were obtained at flow rate ratios of 4-25 . under jetting regime , polydisperse droplets ( CV > <nUm> % ) were formed by detachment from relatively long jets ( between <nUm> and <nUm> times longer than droplet diameter ) and a ratio of the droplet size to orifice size of 2-5 . 
thermal management of integrated circuits ( IC ) has emerged as one of the key challenges for continued performance enhancement of modern microprocessors . cooling schemes utilizing two - phase , microfluidic technologies are some of the more promising modular thermal management solutions for next generation devices . In this study , the flow and heat transfer in pin - fin enhanced micro-gaps are experimentally investigated . it has been known that pin - fin structures inside micro-gaps can increase convective heat transfer coefficients in single phase flow conditions . however , two - phase microfluidic cooling is becoming an increasingly popular method in thermal control of electronics , and this cooling strategy has not been well characterized for pin - fin enhanced micro-gaps . pin - fin , micro-gap structures studied had a pin diameter , height and pitch of <nUm> mm , <nUm> mm and <nUm> mm , respectively , providing an aspect ratio of <nUm> . both the overall micro-gap width and length are <nUm> cm . the working fluid used was r245fa . the structure contained a transparent cover which allowed for visualization of flow through the micro-gap . A high speed camera allowed for image capture and characterization of various two - phase flow regimes . the thermal performances of the heat sink were experimentally evaluated using pressure drop and temperature measurements . 
biological systems such as cells and cellular components are governed by processes , which take place on nanometer to micrometer length scales . x-ray scattering , diffraction and imaging techniques are extremely well suited to study these processes as the spatial resolution extends well into the relevant length scales . At the same time , the investigation of physical and chemical properties and behavior of such systems requires well - defined and controllable sample environments . one successful way to establish such environments , including specified flow fields , concentration gradients and confinement regimes is by employing microfluidic technology tailored to the particular scientific question . this brief review focuses on microfluidic techniques that have been used to investigate biological matter by x-rays . In particular , we show how the characteristics of flow on the micron scale enable new scientific approaches as compared to macroscale experiments . 
during the last two decades , most of the studies on microchannels shows deviations with respect to traditional laws as unusual friction factors or shifts in the transition between laminar and turbulent flow . our study consists in characterizing the dynamic field and heat transfer aspect of a flow in smooth , circular minichannels using a commercial code CFX 5.7.1 . this code use the finite volume method to solve the equations of navier - stokes and offer several turbulences models . In this study , the shear stress turbulence model ( SST ) is used . the results obtained are rich in information . In addition to the results from the theory , established for the traditional pipes , we have experimental results obtained for a minichannel of size similar to those of our study . the validation of our calculations is thus made by a comparison with experimental measurements ( reynaud ) and theoretical values . A good agreement is observed . note however , that a light deviation is observed concerning the transition zone between laminar and turbulent regime . this zone seems to be located for values of reynolds number going from <nUm> and <nUm> . this result was confirmed by many researchers working in the field of the mini and microfluidics . these values show that the transition zone is more precisely pointed , than the classical theory predicted it . the results of this study are not likely to give in cause validity of the traditional laws in the case of the mini-channels until a diameter of <nUm> mm . we showed that deviations are observed compared to the traditional correlations , but generally , a good agreement is noted . 
one of the fundamental problems in supramolecular chemistry , as well as in material sciences , is how to control the self - assembly of polymers on the nanometer scale and how to spontaneously organize them towards the macroscopic scale . to overcome this problem , inspired by the self - assembly systems in nature , which feature the dynamically controlled self - assembly of biopolymers , we have previously proposed a self - assembly system that uses a dynamic liquid / liquid interface with dimensions in the micrometer regime , thereby allowing polymers to self - assemble under precisely controlled nonequilibrium conditions . herein , we further extend this system to the creation of hierarchical self - assembled architectures of polysaccharides . A natural polysaccharide , b-1,3-glucan ( SPG ) , and water were injected into opposite " legs " of microfluidic devices that had a y-shape junction , so that two solvents would gradually mix in the down stem , thereby causing SPG to spontaneously self - assemble along the flow in a head - to - tail fashion , mainly through hydrophobic interactions . In the initial stage , several SPG nanofibers would self - assemble at the y-junction owing to the shearing force , thereby creating oligomers with a three - way junction point . this unique structure , which could not be created through conventional mixing procedures , has a divergent self - assembly capability . the dynamic flow allows the oligomers to interact continuously with SPG nanofibers that are fed into the y-junction , thus amplifying the nanostructure along the flow to form SPG networks . consequently , we were able to create stable , centimeter - length macroscopic polysaccharide strands under the selected flow conditions , which implies that SPG nanofibers were assembled hierarchically in a supramolecular fashion in the dynamic flow . microscopic observations , including SEM and AFM analysis , revealed the existence of clear hierarchical structures inside the obtained strand . the network structures self - assembled to form sub-micrometer-sized fibers . the long fibers further entangled with each other to give stable micrometer - sized fibers , which finally assembled to form the macroscopic strands , in which the final stabilities in the macroscopic regime were governed by that of the network structures in the nanometer regime . thus , we have exploited this new supramolecular system to create hierarchical polymeric architectures under precisely controlled flow conditions , by combining the conventional supramolecular strategy with microfluidic science . you spin me right round : A new supramolecular system is described for the hierarchical organization of self - assembling polymers , which combines conventional supramolecular strategies with microfluidic science . by using this system , stable macroscopic polysaccharide strands with centimeter - scale lengths were created , in which polysaccharide nanofibers were assembled hierarchically in a supramolecular fashion by the dynamic flow ( see figure ) . 
A three dimensional numerical simulation on the droplet formation in a microfluidic t-junction is reported . the mechanism of droplet formation in the immiscible liquid / liquid t-junction system has been studied numerically with the level set method ( LSM ) . various droplet flow patterns such as long slugs , small spheres , stable stream and finally parallel flow are investigated , which are conventionally called squeezing , dripping and jetting regimes correspondingly . apart from those , the transition regime between squeezing and dripping as well as parallel flow regime are also discussed . the pressure of the junction point fluctuated in the droplet formation process and it can reflect the flow pattern in the microchannel exactly and directly . the simulation results show that the pressure profiles of the junction point in the squeezing , dripping and jetting regimes change during the droplet formation process . new insights on the pressure of the junction point during the droplet formation process are provided and the results show that the frequency of the pressure fluctuation is the same as that of new droplet formation . In addition , the pressure of the junction of different contact angles of the dispersed phase with the surface and different capillary numbers ( Ca ) are also analyzed for investigating the droplet formation mechanism . the amplitudes and periods of the pressure in different regimes differ from each other . At the same flow velocity , the amplitudes of the pressure in dripping regime , squeezing regime , jetting regime and parallel flow regime ranks in the descending order . 
solid surface / liquid interactions play an important role in microfluidics and particularly in manipulation of films , drops and bubbles , a basic requirement for a number of lab - on - chip applications . the behavior of solvents in coated microchannels is difficult to be predicted considering theories ; therefore , experimental methods able to estimate the properties at the interface in real time and during the operational regime are amenable . here , we propose to use an experimental setup to evaluate the effective dynamics of solvents inside PDMS microchannels . the influence of the solvent properties as well as of the channel wall 's wettability on the fluid movements was evaluated . modification of the channel properties was achieved by introducing teflon coatings that allow producing stable hydrophobic microchannel walls . the results were fitted according to washburn - type power - law and compared with theoretical calculations of the parameter β that expresses the dependence of capillary dynamics on surface tension c , liquid viscosity η , contact angles θ and the hydraulic radius RH . A comparison between the calculated and the experimental values reveled that parameters other than the contemplated ones influenced the measurements . the main parameter that affects the flow of solvents such as water , methanol ethanol , dimethylformamide , acetonitrile and acetone was found to be the γ / η ratio . considering these results , the investigation tool described here is believed to be promising to predict the dynamics of common organic solvents inside integrated functional fluidic devices and to accurately control solvent flow , particularly in capillary - driven pumpless systems , a basic requirement for widening the application range of PDMS lab - on - chip devices . 
we developed an optical , microfabrication - free approach for performing real - time measurements of individual droplet characteristics ( frequency of production , velocity , and length ) flowing in a transparent microfluidic channel . our approach consists in an interpretation of the differential signal produced by a pair of photodiodes connected head - to - tail due to the variations of illumination at the passage of a droplet . we checked the relevance of this zero - background method by comparing results to video measurements , and observed a very good agreement at rates up to the kHz range . moreover , since the measured values are stored in a simple text file , flow characterization over very long times ( several hours ) becomes accessible . we applied this facility to perform three examples of longterm studies : stationary regimes , transient regimes , and the effect of an external forcing . several unexpected features , like long - period fluctuations , can thus be evidenced . 
micron sized , lipid stabilized bubbles of gas are of interest as contrast agents for ultra-sound ( US ) imaging and increasingly as delivery vehicles for targeted , triggered , therapeutic delivery . microfluidics provides a reproducible means for microbubble production and surface functionalisation . In this study , microbubbles are generated on chip using flow - focussing microfluidic devices that combine streams of gas and liquid through a nozzle a few microns wide and then subjecting the two phases to a downstream pressure drop . while microfluidics has successfully demonstrated the generation of monodisperse bubble populations , these approaches inherently produce low bubble counts . we introduce a new micro-spray flow regime that generates consistently high bubble concentrations that are more clinically relevant compared to traditional monodisperse bubble populations . final bubble concentrations produced by the micro-spray regime were up to <nUm> bubbles mL-1 . the technique is shown to be highly reproducible and by using multiplexed chip arrays , the time taken to produce one millilitre of sample containing <nUm> <nUm> bubbles mL-1 was ∼ <nUm> min . further , we also demonstrate that it is possible to attach liposomes , loaded with quantum dots ( QDs ) or fluorescein , in a single step during MBs formation . 
A detailed experimental study of capillary structures made with high - viscosity fluids is conducted in plane microchannels . we examine the possibility to emulsify fluids via viscous folding instabilities using continuous microflows . non-wetting capillary threads are formed in a sheath of immiscible liquids for a wide range of viscosity and flow rate ratios using symmetric hydrodynamic focusing sections . downstream , threads are significantly deformed in a diverging channel connected to a long plane microchannel . adjusting the residence time of thread structures in the plane channel allows us to produce various degrees of fold coalescence . three typical regimes are identified : thread breakup , partial fold coalescence , and complete fold coalescence . the geometrical features of evolving folds are measured and related to material properties , flow parameters , and microgeometries . this study shows that folded structures offer the opportunity to examine novel interfacial configurations and provides a set of microfluidic techniques for improved manipulation of viscous materials with thin immiscible lubricants at the small scale . 
we report the results of a study on emulsion stability in a microfluidic channel flow using an integrated microfluidic device . the microfluidic circuit enables production of a monodisperse oil - in - water emulsion and monitoring of emulsion stability upon shear - induced collisions . sodium-n-dodecyl sulfate was used as emulsifier , and hexadecane as dispersed phase . we measure the mean drop size at the end of the collision channel as a function of the surfactant and sodium chloride bulk concentration , and as a function of the total flow rate . we find that emulsions are stable against coalescence for SDS bulk concentrations down to <nUm> <nUm> m within the residence time of the droplets in the channel in the absence of added ClNa . the stability of the emulsion at these low SDS bulk concentrations is interpreted in terms of a reduced mobility of the droplet interfaces , which slows down drainage of the film of the continuous phase between the droplets . emulsions stabilized by SDS with added ClNa in the continuous phase display a transition from a stable to unstable regime when increasing the ClNa bulk concentration from <nUm> m to <nUm> m , which is in agreement with predictions using simple DLVO force calculations for colloidal stability . we also estimate the characteristic coalescence time between droplets using a simple coalescence theory and compare the results with values obtained by us previously from trajectory analysis of colliding droplet pairs . 
we demonstrate the use of foam to divert flow from high permeable to low permeable regions in a PDMS heterogeneous porous microfluidic system . foam is generated using a flow - focusing microfluidic device with co-flowing gas and aqueous surfactant streams . foam quality ( gas fraction ) is modulated by adjusting the flow rate of the aqueous surfactant solution while keeping the gas inlet pressure fixed . the foam is then injected into an aqueous - solution filled heterogeneous porous media containing a high and low permeable region and sweep of the saturated aqueous phase is monitored . compared with <nUm> % gas injection , surfactant - stabilized foam is shown to effectively improve the sweep of the aqueous fluid in both high and low permeable regions of the porous micromodel . the best performance of foam on fluid diversion is observed in the lamella - separated foam regime , where the presence of foam can enhance gas saturation in the low permeable region up to <nUm> % at the time of gas breakthrough . the presented results are useful in understanding and designing foam injection in porous underground formations for aquifer remediation and enhanced oil recovery processes . 
this paper reports the investigation of mixing phenomena caused by the interaction between a uniform magnetic field and a magnetic fluid in a microfluidic chamber . the flow system consists of a water - based ferrofluid and a mixture of DI water and glycerol . under a uniform magnetic field , the mismatch in magnetization of the fluids leads to instability at the interface and subsequent rapid mixing . the mismatch of magnetization is determined by concentration of magnetic nanoparticles . full mixing at a relatively low magnetic flux density up to <nUm> mT can be achieved . the paper discusses the impact of key parameters such as magnetic flux density , flow rate ratio and viscosity ratio on the mixing efficiency . two main mixing regimes are observed . In the improved diffusive mixing regime under low field strength , magnetic particles of the ferrofluid migrate into the diamagnetic fluid . In the bulk transport regime under high field strength , the fluid system is mixed rapidly by magnetically induced secondary flow in the chamber . the mixing concept potentially provides a wireless solution for a lab - on - a - chip system that is low - cost , robust , free of induced heat and independent of pH level or ion concentration . 
dynamic pulse experiments for cell analysis require rapid and precise preparation of probes , which is often not possible in a macro-laboratory environment . lab - on - a - chip technology can offer new ways of probe preparation for both chemical and biochemical processes . A passive microfluidic mixer ( micromixer ) is presented in this contribution , which is designed for the preparation of cells . the micromixer is based on the method of split - and - recombination . two alternating channel layers result in a three - dimensional pathway . mixing in the laminar flow regime not only relies on molecular diffusion but is also enhanced by chaotic advection . the mixer was fabricated in a glass-silicon-glass sandwich technology , and mixing was characterized by chemical and biological probes . the contribution of chaotic advection , which appears in repeated <nUm> ° turns of the channel geometry , could be confirmed in computational fluid dynamics ( CFD ) analysis and laser - induced fluorescence images . mixing performance was characterized by chemical iodometry . this method is based on the chemical reaction of lugol 's solution and sodium thiosulfate . the resulting solution changes its color such that mixing becomes visible in a fluidic channel . experiments were conducted for flow rates between <nUm> mL / min and <nUm> mL / min corresponding to reynolds numbers from <nUm> to <nUm> . the experiments showed that fewer mixer units are necessary at higher flow rates because vorticity increases at higher Re in the recombination regions of the mixer . A mixing time of approximately <nUm> ms was achieved at a flow rate of <nUm> mL / min at both inlets , which corresponds to a Re of <nUm> in this channel geometry . biological pulse experiments were performed with the mixer , showing its suitability for preparing biological particles as eukaryotic cells . 
droplet formation in a wide - type microfluidic t-junction was studied using the computational fluid dynamics ( CFD ) method . two distinct regimes of droplet formation were confirmed : dripping and jetting ; and , at both regimes , droplet size decreases with an increase in capillary number . CFD simulation demonstrated that droplet formation in the t-junction can be divided into three steps : droplet emergence and growing up ; separation with the disperse phase ; and detachment from the channel wall . the wettability of the channel wall significantly affects the process of droplet detachment from the channel wall ; also , the simulation clearly showed that droplets can be formed only when the continuous phase fluid preferentially wets the channel wall , that is , its contact angle on the wall is smaller than <nUm> ° . finally , the CFD study verified that the disperse phase flow rate can significantly affect the droplet size as well as the mechanism of droplet formation . 
In this work , we focus on low - dimensional colloidal model systems , via simulation studies and also some complementary experiments , in order to elucidate the interplay between phase behavior , geometric structures and transport properties . In particular , we try to investigate the ( nonlinear ! ) response of these very soft colloidal systems to various perturbations : uniform and uniaxial pressure , laser fields , shear due to moving boundaries and randomly quenched disorder . we study ordering phenomena on surfaces or in monolayers by monte carlo computer simulations of binary hard - disk mixtures , the influence of a substrate being modeled by an external potential . weak external fields allow a controlled tuning of the miscibility of the mixture . we discuss the laser induced de-mixing for the three different possible couplings to the external potential . the structural behavior of hard spheres interacting with repulsive screened coulomb or dipolar interaction in 2D and 3D narrow constrictions is investigated using brownian dynamics simulations . due to misfits between multiples of the lattice parameter and the channel widths , a variety of ordered and disordered lattice structures have been observed . the resulting local lattice structures and defect probabilities are studied for various cross sections . the influence of a self - organized order within the system is reflected in the velocity of the particles and their diffusive behavior . additionally , in an experimental system of dipolar colloidal particles confined by gravity on a solid substrate we investigate the effect of pinning on the dynamics of a two - dimensional colloidal liquid . this work contains sections reviewing previous work by the authors as well as new , unpublished results . among the latter are detailed studies of the phase boundaries of the de-mixing regime in binary systems in external light fields , configurations for shear induced effects at structured walls , studies on the effect of confinement on the structures and defect densities in three - dimensional systems , the effect of confinement and barriers on two - dimensional flow and diffusion , and the effect of pinning sites on the diffusion . 
the flow of an incompressible non-Newtonian fluid over an eccentrically located sphere confined in a circular tube was investigated using three - dimensional steady state computational fluid dynamics simulations . pseudoplastic fluids with different power - law indices of <nUm> , <nUm> , and <nUm> were considered . the effects of ratio of particle diameter to tube diameter ( blockage ratio , BR ) and ratio of offset of the sphere position from the tube axis to the tube radius ( eccentricity , ec ) on the hydrodynamic phenomena around the sphere are reported over a range of particle reynolds numbers ( rep ) . the simulations were carried out in the range ( <nUm> ≤ rep ≤ <nUm> , <nUm> ≤ BR ≤ <nUm> , and <nUm> ≤ ec ≤ <nUm> ) . the drag coefficient predictions for an unconfined sphere were found to be sensitive to the value of the consistency index parameter ( K ) in the viscous flow regime , especially at lower n values . At lower particle reynolds numbers and centrally located sphere , the enhancement in drag coefficient due to blockage ratio was felt least by the fluid with the lowest n value . even at higher rep , higher blockage ratios still could cause significant enhancements in the drag coefficients ( ∼ <nUm> % ) for centrally located spheres . irrespective of the power - law index , eccentric location of the sphere caused a decline in the overall drag coefficient due to the dominant influence of the lower hemisphere which was closer to the tube wall . At the highest particle reynolds numbers , eccentricity , and blockage ratio , asymmetric fluid flow distribution caused opposing effects by decreasing the viscous drag coefficient and increasing the form drag coefficient relative to those obtained with the centrally confined sphere . sharp variations in the shear rate dependent viscosity at the sphere surface could be associated with boundary layer separation . wall effects at higher blockage ratio suppressed the boundary layer separation in the case of the fluid with the highest power - law index . eccentricity also caused accelerated boundary layer separation at the upper hemisphere and absence of boundary layer separation along the lower hemisphere . At lower blockage ratios a maximum in the lift coefficient versus particle reynolds number was usually observed . this study will be relevant in applications such as aseptic food processing , petroleum well drilling , fluidization , and particle transport in microfluidic devices . 
A gelation process was seen to occur when boger fluids made from aqueous solutions of polyacrylamide ( PAA ) and ClNa flowed through porous media with certain characteristics . As these viscoelastic fluids flow through a porous medium , the pressure drop across the bed varies linearly with the flow rate , as also happens with newtonian fluids . above a critical flow rate , elastic effects set in and the pressure drop grows above the low-flow-rate linear regime . increasing further the flow rate , a more dramatic increase in the slope of the pressure drop curve can be observed as a consequence of nanogel formation . In this work , we discuss the reasons for this gelation process based on our measurements using porous media of different sizes , porosity and chemical composition . additionally , the rheological properties of the fluids were investigated for shear and extensional flows . the fluids were also tested as they flowed through different microfluidic analogues of the porous media . the results indicate that the nanogel inception occurs with the adsorption of PAA molecules on the surface of the porous media particles that contain silica on their surfaces . subsequently , if the interparticle space is small enough a jamming process occurs leading to flow - induced gel formation . 
self oscillations in homogeneous chemical systems have been studied extensively in diverse array of systems ranging from flow and non-flow , stirred and unstirred , for non-linear chemical reactions coupled with or without the effect of diffusion and multiple systems exhibiting synchronized oscillations . there are , however not many examples in which specific geometric features of the reaction chamber turns an otherwise stable system oscillatory , importantly at very low reynolds number regime . here , we describe such a phenomenon in regard to a microfluidic fuel cell for which the cell potential turns oscillatory when its smooth wall is replaced by one patterned with microscopic features . In essence , we have a membraneless fuel cell in which fuel and oxidant streams flow in laminar contact , side by side , forming a sharp interface . for smooth surface of the channel wall , with steady flow of fuel and oxidant , the cell generates a constant open circuit potential ( OCP ) . however , when the surface of the channel is patterned with parallel triangular ridges , although the flow continues to remain temporally steady , time invariant oscillating OCP ensues within a small window of very low reynolds number . we have presented a mechanism for occurrence of these oscillations . 
the paper is dedicated to experimental studies and numerical simulations of viscous and viscoelastic flows in microchannels . the present work investigates separation phenomena and the formation of vortical structures in two microbifurcations with one closed branch : ( 1 ) y-bifurcation with a square cross section and ( 2 ) t-bifurcation with trapezoidal sections and small aspect ratios depth / width . the main goal of the study is to characterize the dynamics of the vortex from the vicinity of y-bifurcation and to emphasize the changes induced by the presence of elasticity on the local path lines . velocity measurements and flow pattern visualizations of newtonian fluid ( deionized water ) and weakly elastic polymer solution ( low concentration of polyacrylamide in water ) are obtained using a lPIV system . numerical computations are performed in 2D and 3D flow configurations with the commercial FLUENT code . the newtonian simulations offer very precise descriptions of the vortical structures for all flow regimes . In the case of polymer solution , the comparison between experimental data and numerical solutions for generalized newtonian models prove the dominant role of elasticity in modifications induced on the vortical patterns in the analyzed microgeometries . the present topic is of great interest in developing novel microfluidic applications which require precise control of the hydrodynamics of viscoelastic fluids in the vicinity of complex geometries and patterned surfaces . 
accurate modeling of gas microflow is crucial for the microfluidic devices in MEMS . gas microflows through these devices are often in the slip and transition flow regimes , characterized by the knudsen number of the order of 10-2 ∼ <nUm> . an increasing number of researchers now dedicate great attention to the developments in the modeling of non-equilibrium boundary conditions in the gas microflows , concentrating on the slip model . In this review , we present various slip models obtained from different theoretical , computational and experimental studies for gas microflows . correct descriptions of the knudsen layer effect are of critical importance in modeling and designing of gas microflow systems and in predicting their performances . theoretical descriptions of the gas - surface interaction and gas - surface molecular interaction models are introduced to describe the boundary conditions . various methods and techniques for determination of the slip coefficients are reviewed . the review presents the considerable success in the implementation of various slip boundary conditions to extend the navier - stokes ( N-S ) equations into the slip and transition flow regimes . comparisons of different values and formulations of the first- and second - order slip coefficients and models reveal the discrepancies arising from different definitions in the first - order slip coefficient and various approaches to determine the second - order slip coefficient . In addition , no consensus has been reached on the correct and generalized form of higher - order slip expression . the influences of specific effects , such as effective mean free path of the gas molecules and viscosity , surface roughness , gas composition and tangential momentum accommodation coefficient , on the hybrid slip models for gas microflows are analyzed and discussed . it shows that although the various hybrid slip models are proposed from different viewpoints , they can contribute to N-S equations for capturing the high knudsen number effects in the slip and transition flow regimes . future studies are also discussed for improving the understanding of gas microflows and enabling us to exactly predict and actively control gas slip . 
gas flows through long micro-channels of various cross sections have been extensively investigated over the years both numerically and experimentally . In various technological applications including microfluidics , these micro-channels are combined together in order to form a micro-channel network . computational algorithms for solving gas pipe networks in the hydrodynamic regime are well developed . however , corresponding tools for solving networks consisting of micro-channels under any degree of gas rarefaction is very limited . recently a kinetic algorithm has been developed to simulate gas distribution systems consisting of long circular channels under any vacuum conditions . In the present work this algorithm is generalized and extended into micro-channels of arbitrary cross-section etched by KOH in silicon ( triangular and trapezoidal channels with acute angle of <nUm> ° ) . since a kinetic approach is implemented , the analysis is valid and the results are accurate in the whole range of the knudsen number , while the involved computational effort is very small . this is achieved by successfully integrating the kinetic results for the corresponding single channels into the general solver for designing the gas pipe network . to demonstrate the feasibility of the approach two typical systems consisting of long rectangular and trapezoidal micro-channels are solved . 
navigating in bodily fluids to perform targeted diagnosis and therapy has recently raised the problem of robust control of magnetic microrobots under real endovascular conditions . various control approaches have been proposed in the literature but few of them have been experimentally validated . In this paper , we point out the problem of navigation controllability of magnetic microrobots in high viscous fluids and under pulsatile flow for endovascular applications . we consider the experimental navigation along a desired trajectory , in a simplified millimeter - sized arterial bifurcation , operating in fluids at the low-Reynolds-number regime where viscous drag significantly dominates over inertia . different viscosity environments are tested under a systolic pulsatile flow compatible with heart beating . the control performances in terms tracking , robustness and stability are then experimentally demonstrated . 
we explore the flow of a nematic liquid crystal in microfluidic channels with a rectangular cross section through experiments and numerical modeling . the flow profile and the liquid crystal orientational profile show three distinct regimes of weak , medium , and strong flow as the driving pressure is varied . these are identified by comparing polarizing optical microscopy experiments and numerical solutions of the nematofluidic equations of motion . the relative stability of the regimes is related to the de gennes characteristic shear - flow lengths e1 and e2 , together with the channel 's aspect ratio w / d . finally , we show that the liquid crystalline microfluidic flow can be fully steered from left to right of a simple microchannel by applying transverse temperature gradients . 
the micrometric devices are present in various industrial manufacturing processes ( such as microfilters ) , medical tools ( micro pumps for instance ) and in measuring instruments . In order to describe the gas flows in microchannels involved in these systems , the DSMC methods are very well adapted but they are expensive in computation time [ <nUm> , <nUm> ] . consequently , it is of main interest to develop asymptotic models describing these flows . In this contribution , our purpose is to model the flow of a mixture of two compressible gases in microchannels . we are interested in flows at low mach numbers and with low to moderate knudsen numbers so that the flow is in the slip regime . 
the understanding of physical phenomena such as flow behavior is essential in order to develop appropriate micromixers for industrial or biomedical applications . In this paper , the relevance of an electrochemical method is demonstrated for a microfluidic diagnostic in the case of high fluctuating flow , over a wide range of reynolds numbers ( <nUm> . < Re < . <nUm> ) corresponding to the engulfment flow regime . an experimental analysis of the signal measured at microprobes embedded to the wall of microsystems is discussed . the power spectral density ( PSD ) of the wall shear rate is then obtained by discrete fourier transform of the signal . information about the interaction flow structures / walls can be obtained by analyzing the PSD of the wall shear rate . the electrochemical technique is applied to flow within a cross-shaped micromixer with channels having square cross-sections of 400. mm in side . the inlet and outlet channels are symmetric . the PSD of wall shear rate fluctuations reveals various flow characteristics depending on the inlet flow rate and the probe positions along the microchannel . A comparison with results previously obtained with this kind of micromixers allows concluding about the length of flow establishment in such systems . 
with recent increasing trend towards development of " easy to fabricate " and simple millifluidic systems that could provide required control as well as high throughput , we present here a demonstration of potential opportunities for controlled droplet / slug formation within a flow - focusing millifluidic chip . numerical simulations supported by experimental evidence show that the millifluidic device provides similar control in slug formation as in the case of microfluidic devices . more specifically , our investigations reveal that the acquired slug volume depends on the squeezing volume ( vsqueeze ) and blockage volume ( vblock ) in the squeezing regime . while the squeezing volume ( vsqueeze ) can be tuned by manipulating the flow rate of the continuous phase , the blockage volume ( vblock ) depended only on the geometry of the focusing region . based on numerical simulations , two millifluidic flow focusing channel designs to produce small slugs were suggested . the slugs were utilized for the synthesis of uniform copper nanoparticles . the findings are anticipated to have implications for a number fields ranging from fluid dynamics , lab - on - a - chip devices , chemical engineering , nanomaterials synthesis , protein crystallization to advanced drug delivery as well as chip fabrication . 
In the laminar regimes typical of microfluidic systems ' , mixing is governed by molecular diffusion ; however this process is slow in nature . consequently , passive or active methods are usually sought for effective mixing . In this work , open fluidic channels will be investigated ; these channels are bounded on all but one face by an air / fluid interface . firstly , it will be shown that flow in open channels can merge at a y-junction in a stable manner ; hence two fluids can be brought into contact with each other . secondly , the mixing of these two fluids will be studied . At high flow rates ( > <nUm> ml / min)mixing occurs at the junction without need for additional intervention , this mixing is far swifter than can be expected from molecular diffusion . At lower flowrates , intervention is required . A major motivation for open fluidic channels is the ability to interact with the surrounding air environment ; this feature is used to effect the desired mixing . it is shown that by blowing an air jet across the junction , shear stresses at the air / fluid interface causes a flow profile within the fluid inductive to rapid mixing of the fluids . 
dripping and jetting regimes in microfluidic multiphase flows have been investigated extensively , and this review summarizes the main observations and physical understandings in this field to date for three common device geometries : coaxial , flow - focusing and t-junction . the format of the presentation allows for simple and direct comparison of the different conditions for drop and jet formation , as well as the relative ease and utility of forming either drops or jets among the three geometries . the emphasis is on the use of drops and jets as templates for microparticle and microfibre syntheses , and a description is given of the more common methods of solidification and strategies for achieving complex multicomponent microparticles and microfibres . 
the flow behavior of polymer solutions with relatively high viscosity in a coaxial micro-channel device was investigated . In the experiment , two kinds of flow patterns , dripping and jetting , could be formed . the jetting regime occurred as flow rate and viscosity of the fluids increased . the influence of two - phase viscosities and flow rates on drop size was investigated . the results could be used to guide the preparation of polymer micro-sized spheres . mathematic models for predicting drop size in two flow patterns were established separately , and the calculated values fitted experimental results well . 
A high - speed camera was used to visualize and determine the size of formed droplet for liquid - liquid two - phase flow in the t-junction microchannels with different aspect ratios . microchannels with different dimensions of <nUm> mm × <nUm> mm , <nUm> mm × <nUm> mm , <nUm> mm × <nUm> mm in depth and width were used in this work . cyclohexane and deionized water with <nUm> % surfactant sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)-glycerol ( <nUm> % , <nUm> % , <nUm> % ) were used as the oil ( dispersed ) and water ( continuous ) phases , respectively . the effects of microchannel geometry , flow rates of both phases and physical properties of fluids on the size of droplet formed were investigated in the slug , transient and droplet regimes . the result showed that the droplet size decreased with increasing flow rate , viscosity and capillary number of the continuous phase , while it increased with increasing width of microchannels and flow rate of the dispersed phase . the correlations for predicting the size of formed droplet were proposed in taking capillary number , ratio of oil / water flow rates and aspect ratio of microchannels into account , and the calculated values by presented correlations agreed well with the experimental data . 
flow - focusing microfluidic devices ( FFMDs ) can produce microbubbles ( MBs ) with precisely controlled diameters and a narrow size distribution . In this paper , poly-dimethyl-siloxane based , rectangular - nozzle , two - dimensional ( 2-D ) planar , expanding - nozzle FFMDs were characterized using a high speed camera to determine the production rate and diameter of tween <nUm> ( <nUm> % v / v ) stabilized MBs . the effect of gas pressure and liquid flow rate on MB production rate and diameter was analyzed in order to develop a relationship between FFMD input parameters and MB production . MB generation was observed to transition through five regimes at a constant gas pressure and increasing liquid flow rate . each MB generation event ( i.e. , break - off to break - off ) was further separated into two characteristic phases : bubbling and waiting . the duration of the bubbling phase was linearly related to the liquid flow rate , while the duration of the waiting phase was related to both liquid flow rate and gas pressure . the MB production rate was found to be inversely proportional to the sum of the bubbling and waiting times , while the diameter was found to be proportional to the product of the gas pressure and bubbling time . 
whilst a multitude of techniques have been employed to study the biology of tumour tissue and its response to chemotherapeutic reagents , most current methodologies do not capture the sophistication of the in vivo environment . microfluidics however offers the ability to maintain and interrogate primary tissue samples in an environment with biomimetic flow characteristics . In this study head and neck squamous cell carcinoma ( HNSCC ) tumour biopsies have been used to investigate the performance of a microfluidic device for generating clinically - useful information . the response of fresh and cryogenically - frozen primary HNSCC or metastatic lymph node samples to chemotherapy drugs ( cisplatin , 5-flurouracil or docetaxel ) , alone and in combination , were monitored for both proliferation ( water - soluble tetrazolium salt metabolism ) and cell death biomarker release ( lactate dehydrogenase , LDH ) " off - chip " . the frozen tissue showed no significant difference in terms of either proliferation or LDH release in comparison with the matched fresh samples . administration of all drugs caused cell death , in a dose - response manner , with the combination showing the greatest amount of cytotoxicity particularly at days <nUm> and <nUm> ; correlating well with published clinical data . the system described here offers an innovative method for studying the tumour microenvironment in vitro and , through incorporation of relevant analytical modules , provides the basis of a pre-clinical device that can be used to define personalised treatment regimens . 
negative selection - based circulating tumor cell ( CTC ) isolation is believed valuable to harvest more native , and in particular all possible CTCs without biases relevant to the properties of surface antigens on the CTCs . under such a cell isolation strategy , however , the CTC purity is normally compromised . to address this issue , this study reports the integration of optically-induced- dielectrophoretic ( ODEP ) force - based cell manipulation , and a laminar flow regime in a microfluidic platform for the isolation of untreated , and highly pure CTCs after conventional negative selection - based CTC isolation . In the design , six sections of moving light - bar screens were continuously and simultaneously exerted in two parallel laminar flows to concurrently separate the cancer cells from the leukocytes based on their size difference and electric properties . the separated cell populations were further partitioned , delivered , and collected through the two flows . with this approach , the cancer cells can be isolated in a continuous , effective , and efficient manner . In this study , the operating conditions of ODEP for the manipulation of prostate cancer ( PC-3 ) and human oral cancer ( OEC-M1 ) cells , and leukocytes with minor cell aggregation phenomenon were first characterized . moreover , performances of the proposed method for the isolation of cancer cells were experimentally investigated . the results showed that the presented CTC isolation scheme was able to isolate PC-3 cells or OEC-M1 cells from a leukocyte background with high recovery rate ( PC-3 cells : 76-83 % , OEC-M1 cells : 61-68 % ) , and high purity ( PC-3 cells : 74-82 % , OEC-M1 cells : 64-66 % ) ( set flow rate : <nUm> ml min-1 and sample volume : <nUm> ml ) . the latter is beyond what is currently possible in the conventional CTC isolations . moreover , the viability of isolated cancer cells was evaluated to be as high as <nUm> ± <nUm> % , and <nUm> ± <nUm> % for the PC-3 , and OEC-M1 cells , respectively . furthermore , the isolated cancer cells were also shown to preserve their proliferative capability . As a whole , this study has presented an ODEP - based microfluidic platform that is capable of isolating CTCs in a continuous , label - free , cell - friendly , and particularly highly pure manner . all these traits are found particularly meaningful for exploiting the harvested CTCs for the subsequent cell - based , or biochemical assays . 
we present a mathematical model and corresponding series of microfluidic experiments examining the flow of a viscous fluid past an elastic fibre in a three - dimensional channel . the fibre 's axis lies perpendicular to the direction of flow and its base is clamped to one wall of the channel ; the sidewalls of the channel are close to the fibre , confining the flow . experiments show that there is a linear relationship between deflection and flow rate for highly confined fibres at low flow rates , which inspires an asymptotic treatment of the problem in this regime . the three - dimensional problem is reduced to a two - dimensional model , consisting of hele - shaw flow past a barrier , with boundary conditions at the barrier that allow for the effects of flexibility and three - dimensional leakage . the analysis yields insight into the competing effects of flexion and leakage , and an analytical solution is derived for the leading - order pressure field corresponding to a slit that partially blocks a two - dimensional channel . the predictions of our model show favourable agreement with experimental results , allowing measurement of the fibre 's elasticity and the flow rate in the channel . 
the <nUm> special issue of journal of physics d : applied physics sheds light on the different aspects in microfluidics research starting from fundamental research reaching all the way to industrial applications . nunes and co-researchers review the different regimes when replacing one of the fluids by an oil phase and varying flow rates and device geometries with a particular emphasis on using multiphase microfluidics for synthesis of particles or fibres . tran and co-workers move a considerable step towards applicability of water - in - oil emulsions for biological research and review ultrahigh - throughput methods used for bio-assays . the article by lagus et al focuses this topic specifically on single - cell experiments . wang and researchers fabricate microcrawlers that can be thermally set in motion . finally , holtze gives a perspective on the possibility to upscale and apply such methods in industry . 
here we demonstrate the generation of polymer monolithic surfaces possessing a gradient of pore and polymer globule sizes from ∼ <nUm> to ∼ <nUm> mm defined by the composition of two polymerization mixtures injected into a microfluidic chip . to generate the gradient , we used a PDMS microfluidic chip with a cascade micromixer with a subsequent reaction chamber for the formation of a continuous gradient film . the micromixer has zigzag channels of <nUm> × <nUm> mm2 cross section and six cascades . the chip was used with a reversible bonding connection , realized by curing agent coating . after polymerization in the microfluidic chip the reversible bond was opened , resulting in a <nUm> mm thick polymer film possessing the pore size gradient . the gradient formation in the microfluidic reaction chamber was studied using microscopic laser - induced fluorescence ( mLIF ) and different model fluids . formation of linear gradients was shown using the fluids of the same density by both diffusive mixing at flow rates of <nUm> mL / min and in a convective mixing regime at flow rates of <nUm> mL / min . by using different density fluids , formation of a two - dimensional wedge - like gradient controlled by the density difference and orientation of the microfluidic chip was observed . 
A passive micromixer with wavy channel walls with a sinusoidal variation is proposed , and numerical simulations based on navier - stokes equations are carried out for reynolds numbers ( Re ) from <nUm> ≤ Re ≤ <nUm> . ethanol and water are used as the working fiuids for mixing . A mixing index is employed to evaluate the performance of the micromixer . A different realization of chaotic mixing based on dean vortices is observed with a shift in the center of rotation toward the inner sinusoidal wall for lower - wavelength mixers . the mixing index is found to sensitively increase as the wavelength of the sinusoidal channel walls decreases over the entire Re range considered . A parametric study is also carried out with the amplitude , offset-y , and number of cycles as the geometrical parameters . specifically , Re = <nUm> and <nUm> are chosen to demarcate the effects of these parameters in terms of the mixing performance for difiusion- ( Re ≤ <nUm> ) and recirculation- ( Re ≥ <nUm> ) dominated regimes . the amplitude turns out to be an important parameter that significantly affects the mixing performance . the proposed sinusoidal micromixer shows much better mixing performance than square - wave and zigzag micromixers for the same wavelength . the proposed micromixer can easily be realized and integrated with microfluidic systems such as lab - on - a - chip and micro-total analysis systems ( m-TAS ) because of its simple in-plane structure . 
the improved mass transfer and reduced macroscopic backmixing of segmented flow regimes in mini and microchannels favour its application in three - phase reaction processes . therefore , industrial available and standardised catalyst particles or pellets may benefit from these microfluidic phenomena if they are packed into inert minichannels . such packings form the key components of composite minichannel reactors . In order to evaluate this reactor concept , hydrodynamic phenomena , mass transfer , and pressure drop will be examined for a reactor consisting of a ceramic minichannel packing with a hydraulic diameter of 1.0. mm and dumped spherical catalyst particles of 0.8. mm in diameter . the experimental data , achieved in a setup combining hydrodynamic observation and chemical reaction , were used to derive universal applicable correlations to predict mass transfer coefficients and friction factors from reynolds , schmidt , and sherwood numbers . the work concludes with an extensive comparison of composite minichannel reactors with conventional multiphase reactors and developing packed - bed reactors in terms of mass transfer capability , power consumption , and contacting efficiency.At identical power consumption , the investigated composite minichannel reactor offered a remarkably higher overall mass transfer rate for the gaseous compound than conventional trickle - bed , slurry bubble column , or slurry stirred tank reactors . similar rates or even higher rates were achieved in miniaturised packed - bed reactors with particles less than 1.0. mm in diameter . consequently , it is expected that structured and miniaturised packed - bed reactors are a promising concept to intensify multiphase reaction processes , e.g. by switching from batch to continuous processing . 
the bubble formation in a square microchannel with a converging shape mixing junction has been investigated under gas - liquid taylor flow using a high - speed camera . A typical bubble formation process was found to consist of two steps including the expansion and rupture steps . the bubble length could be approximated as the product of the rupture time and two - phase mixture velocity . significant influence of liquid viscosity and two - phase mixture velocity on the bubble length was observed , although a linear dependence of the bubble length on gas - liquid flow ratio is present for a given two - phase mixture velocity or liquid viscosity . this indicates that shear stress plays an important role in determining the bubble length in the current microfluidic device even at low capillary numbers where the squeezing regime is expected to predominate . an empirical correlation expressing the bubble length as a function of gas - liquid flow ratio , liquid viscosity and two - phase mixture velocity was developed to describe the experimental results . the bubble frequency was found to reach a maximum as gas - liquid flow ratio is increased from <nUm> to <nUm> . the cross-sectional shape of taylor bubble was close to be square at low capillary numbers , which is in agreement with the literature results . 
microfluidic and nanofluidic devices have undergone rapid development in recent years . functions integrated onto such devices provide lab - on - a - chip solutions for many biomedical , chemical , and engineering applications . In this paper , a lab - on - a - chip technique for direct visualization of the single- and two - phase pressure - driven flows in nano-scale channels was developed . the nanofluidic chip was designed and fabricated ; concentration dependent fluorescence signal correlation was developed for the determination of flow rate . experiments of single and two - phase flow in nano-scale channels with <nUm> nm depth were conducted . the linearity correlation between flow rate and pressure drop in nanochannels was obtained and fit closely into poiseuille 's law . meanwhile , three different flow patterns , single , annular , and stratified , were observed from the two - phase flow in the nanochannel experiments and their special features were described . A two - phase flow regime map for nanochannels is presented . results are of critical importance to both fundamental study and many applications . 
we produced jets of two immiscible liquids in a standard microfluidic flow focusing geometry , using semi-dilute aqueous polymer solutions as the external phase and immiscible liquids , oil or photocurable polymers as the internal one . we map out the different flow regimes on a " phase diagram " . two new flow regimes - oscillatory jet and spout - are observed , as a result of the non-Newtonian behavior of the external phase . In the spout regime , cusp - shaped interfaces form at the junction , emitting extremely small round jets ( spouts ) , with diameters ranging between <nUm> and <nUm> mm , i.e. an order of magnitude smaller than the microchannel cross-sectional dimensions . these spouts are found to be stable over remarkably long distances . we analyze the properties of the cusps and the spouts in some detail . the system can be utilized to synthesize fibers of micrometric sizes : the fibers we obtained , under different flow conditions , have diameters ranging between <nUm> and <nUm> mm and lengths ranging between <nUm> mm and <nUm> centimeters . 
we present a microfluidic platform for the continuous separation of suspended particles based on their size and settling velocity . the separation method takes advantage of the flow field in the vicinity and inside slanted open cavities . these cavities induce flow along them , which deflects the suspended particles to a different degree depending on the extent to which they penetrate into the cavities . the cumulative deflection in the periodic array ultimately leads to vector chromatography , with the different species in the sample moving in different directions . we demonstrate density and size based separation over a range of flow rates by separating polystyrene and silica particles and show that purities nearing <nUm> % can be achieved for multicomponent mixtures . we also demonstrate the potential of the platform to separate biological cells by fractionating different blood components . we discuss the presence of two regimes , depending on the ratio between the settling velocity and the velocity of the particles across the open cavities . the proposed platform could also integrate additional separative force fields in the direction normal to the plane of the cavities to fractionate specific mixtures based on the distinguishing properties of the component species . 
microfluidics is an emerging multidisciplinary field that has the potential to provide solutions to many of the current challenges in managing head and neck squamous cell carcinoma ( HNSCC ) . treatment strategies for this disease are often complex and associated with significant morbidity and mortality ; furthermore , prediction of response to treatment remains inaccurate . microfluidic technology allows a small sample of tumor to be maintained alive ex vivo within a microenvironment that mimics the in vivo milieu ; the response of this tumor biopsy to treatment regimens can subsequently be investigated . microfluidics is the science and technology of systems that process or manipulate microliter to nanoliter volumes of fluids in purpose - built devices fabricated from glass or other biocompatible polymers . the technology also involves miniaturization and integration of various laboratory procedures into novel analysis devices . the purpose of this review is to provide an overview of microfluidic devices and discuss potential applications in HNSCC management . 
A generalised form of the finitely extensible non-linear elastic ( FENE ) model for modelling non-linear flow of semi-dilute polymer solutions is proposed . it accounts for conformation - dependent polymer elasticity and predicts shear - thinning shear viscosity , non-linear elongational viscosity and first and second normal stress differences . the rheometric material functions predicted by the model are critically compared with the results of the linear Phan-Thien-Tanner model . the predictabilities of these constitutive models under benchmark flow problems are evaluated by time - dependent simulations , using finite volume method based on a CFD simulation toolbox . the effects of the model parameters , the inertia and the contraction ratio are numerically studied . the modified FENE model qualitatively captures the non-linear flow phenomena of polymer solution in the high elasticity number ( el ) flow regime observed in experiments . the results show that an accurate growth function of the elongational viscosity is the key to the prediction of the time - dependent highly asymmetric flow patterns . 
the majority of bacteria in nature live in biofilms , where they are encased by extracellular polymeric substances ( EPS ) and adhere to various surfaces and interfaces . investigating the process of biofilm formation is critical for advancing our understanding of microbes in their most common mode of living . despite progress in characterizing the effect of various environmental factors on biofilm formation , work remains to be done in the realm of exploring the inter-relationship between hydrodynamics , microbial adhesion and biofilm growth . we investigate the impact of secondary flow structures , which are created due to semi-confined features in a microfluidic device , on biofilm formation of shewanella oneidensis MR-1 . secondary flows are important in many natural and artificial systems , but few studies have investigated their role in biofilm formation . to direct secondary flows in the creeping flow regime , where the reynolds number is low , we flow microbe - laden culture through microscale confinement features . we demonstrate that these confinement features can result in pronounced changes in biofilm dynamics as a function of the fluid flow rate . 
this paper investigates the hydrodynamics of the two - phase liquid - gas taylor or ' slug ' flow regime commonly encountered in micro and mini-channel flows . the primary focus is on understanding the mechanisms that lead to variations in the thickness of deposited liquid films and their effect on flow dynamics . A variety of test fluids are utilised over a range of experimental velocities , leading to significant variations in capillary and reynolds number . slug flow regimes and liquid films formed under these conditions are observed using high speed optical microscopy with refractive index matching used to account for tube external curvature . an analytical correction procedure is also employed to correct for refraction errors due to light transmission through differing depths of liquid film on the interior tube surface , since each fluid has differing refractive index . experimental data is found to correlate well with an existing model for film thickness when bubble velocity is used in evaluating capillary number . while this model was developed for capillary numbers up to <nUm> , the present data significantly extends its application range to capillary numbers as high as <nUm> . A significant difference between the bubble and mean two phase velocity was also observed and related to the ratio of cross-sectional areas between the channel and the bubble which is shown to be valid when the viscosity ratio between phases is sufficiently high . furthermore , a new model is put forward for predicting bubble velocity in taylor flows when the viscosity ratio between phases is low and velocity within the film becomes appreciable . expansion of the gaseous phase due to pressure drop along the channel was also shown to contribute to a significant increase in mean two phase velocity and this was successfully accounted for using pressure drop correlations and ideal gas relations . overall , the study provides a greater understanding of liquid film deposition and bubble dynamics in taylor flows and should enable future studies to more accurately model parameters of interest in microfluidic devices incorporating such flows . 
three - dimensional ( 3-D ) gas-liquid-solid flow and mixing behaviors in microchannels were simulated by coupled volume of fluid and discrete phase method and simulations were validated against observations . the detachment time and length of gas slug are shortened in liquid - solid flow , compared with those in liquid flow due to higher superficial viscosity of liquid - solid mixture , which will move the bubble formation toward the dripping regime . solid particles mainly distribute in liquid slug and particle flow shows obvious periodicity . with the increase of contact angle of the inner wall , gas slug ( 0-50 ° ) , stratified ( 77-120 ° ) , and liquid drop ( <nUm> ° ) flows are observed . the residence time distributions of solid and liquid phases are similar because particles behave as tracers . the backmixing of solid and liquid phases in liquid drop flow is the weakest among the three flow patterns , and the backmixing of gas phase in slug flow is weaker than that in both stratified and liquid drop flows . the results can provide a theoretical basis for the design of microreactors . 
A new paradigm for selective pumping of fluids in a complex network of channels in the microscale flow regime is presented . the model is inspired by internal flow distributions produced by the rhythmic wall contractions observed in many insect tracheal networks . the approach presented here is a natural extension of previous two - dimensional modeling of insect - inspired microscale flow transport in a single channel , and aims to manipulate fluids efficiently in microscale networks without the use of any mechanical valves . this selective pumping approach enables fluids to be transported , controlled and precisely directed into a specific branch in a network while avoiding other possible routes . In order to present a quantitative analysis of the selective pumping approach presented here , the velocity and pressure fields and the time - averaged net flow that are induced by prescribed wall contractions are calculated numerically using the method of fundamental solutions . more specifically , the stokeslets - meshfree method is used in this study to solve the stokes equations that govern the flow motions in a network with moving wall contractions . the results presented here might help in understanding some features of the insect respiratory system function and guide efforts to fabricate novel microfluidic devices for flow transport and mixing , and targeted drug delivery applications . 
In this work , a two dimensional simulation of segmented micro coflows of CO2 and water in microcapillaries ( <nUm> < T ( ° C ) < <nUm> and <nUm> < p ( MPa ) < <nUm> ) was carried out using a combination of the one - fluid model and the volume of fluid ( VOF ) method to describe the two - phase flow and a penalty method to account for the wetting property of the capillary walls . the computational work was validated by comparing numerical and experimental results in both the dripping and jetting regimes . the agreement of the calculated pressure difference across the droplet or jet interface with the laplace - young 's law was assessed as supplementary criteria . the effects of CO2 / water interfacial tension ( <nUm> < σ ( mN m-1 ) < <nUm> ) and wall wettability ( contact angle CO2 / wall varying from <nUm> to <nUm> ) on the segmented water - supercritical CO2 microflows were specially described . it was shown that switching the wall surface from hydrophilic to hydrophobic by tuning the contact angle allows for changing the droplet curvature so that the continuous water phase eventually undergoes a phase inversion resulting in water droplets / slugs formation in a continuous CO <nUm> phase . 
microcapsules templated from microfluidic double emulsions attract a great attention due to their broad new potential applications . we present a method to form transparent polymer microcapsules in small sizes of ~ <nUm> mm with aqueous cores and fully closed shells . we controlled the size ratio of the aqueous core to the polymer shell not only by flow rates of the double emulsions , but also by synergetic interaction between surfactants at the interface of immiscible fluids . we also found that fully closed shells can be formed by generating the double emulsion droplets in a jetting regime , in which the aqueous cores are confined centrally in the double emulsion droplets . we demonstrated the formation of barcodes in these microcapsules for multiplexed bioassays . these transparent microcapsules also have wide and high potentials for the development of various microsensors by functionalizing the liquid - state cores with compounds sensitive and responsive to temperature , light or electromagnetic field . 
A picture of the continuous transition of particle behavior with increasing reynolds number ( Re ) is presented by the study of equilibrium positions andparticle array configurations in curved microfluidic channels . particles with different diameters ( d = 10-20 mm ) are studied flowing in curved channels of different heights ( h = <nUm> and <nUm> mm ). the study focuses on an intermediate range ( Re = 10-40 ) where the competing inertial force and the dean force result in complex phenomena which include particle train twisting , particle focusing in the same hybrid array , and the tendency of the smaller particles leading a hybrid array . these observations are coupled to numerical computations to further the quantitative understanding of the underlying physical systems . three - dimensional finite - element modeling of the channel reveals the lateral flow - focusing position in the channel under varying Re . dissipative hydrodynamic simulations describe the stability of each observed particle train configuration . 
In several areas of science and technology there is a strong need for concentrating , separating and sorting small particles suspended in gaseous flows . acoustic fields can be used to accomplish this task , an approach extensively used in liquid phase microfluidics that has great potential for aerosol treatment . this paper presents an experimental investigation of acoustophoresis for very small particles in gases , with sizes ranging from tens to hundreds of nanometers . the phenomenon is studied in a rectangular channel with variable height in which a standing acoustic field is created by a broadband electrostatic transducer operated in the 50-100 kHz range . downstream of the separation channel , the flow is separated into enriched and depleted streams with adjustable slits for analysis . the particle number density and size distribution is measured with a scanning mobility particle sizer ( SMPS ) as a function of position in the standing wave pattern . from these measurements , the separation efficiency is determined as a function of the particle size and the amplitude of the acoustic field . for the very small particles used here , this yields novel information on the magnitude of acoustophoretic forces in the transition and molecular flow regimes . 
we present gravitational field - flow fractionation and hydrodynamic chromatography of colloids eluting through <nUm> mm microchannels . using video microscopy and mesoscopic simulations , we investigate the average retention ratio of colloids with both a large specific weight and neutral buoyancy . we consider the entire range of colloid sizes , including particles that barely fit in the microchannel and nanoscopic particles . ideal theory predicts four operational modes , from hydrodynamic chromatography to faxen - mode field - flow fractionation . we experimentally demonstrate , for the first time , the existence of the faxen - mode field - flow fractionation and the transition from hydrodynamic chromatography to normal - mode field - flow fractionation . furthermore , video microscopy and simulations show that the retention ratios are largely reduced above the steric - inversion point , causing the variation of the retention ratio in the steric- and faxen - mode regimes to be suppressed due to increased drag . we demonstrate that theory can accurately predict retention ratios if hydrodynamic interactions with the microchannel walls ( wall drag ) are added to the ideal theory . rather than limiting the applicability , these effects allow the microfluidic channel size to be tuned to ensure high selectivity . our findings indicate that particle velocimetry methods must account for the wall - induced lag when determining flow rates in highly confining systems . 
fuel cells are gaining momentum as a critical component in the renewable energy mix for stationary , transportation , and portable power applications . state - of - the - art fuel cell technology benefits greatly from nanotechnology applied to nanostructured membranes , catalysts , and electrodes . however , the potential of utilizing nanofluidics for fuel cells has not yet been explored , despite the significant opportunity of harnessing rapid nanoscale reactant transport in close proximity to the reactive sites . In the present article , a nanofluidic fuel cell that utilizes fluid flow through nanoporous media is conceptualized and demonstrated for the first time . this transformative concept captures the advantages of recently developed membraneless and catalyst - free fuel cell architectures paired with the enhanced interfacial contact area enabled by nanofluidics . when compared to previously reported microfluidic fuel cells , the prototype nanofluidic fuel cell demonstrates increased surface area , reduced activation overpotential , superior kinetic characteristics , and moderately enhanced fuel cell performance in the high cell voltage regime with up to <nUm> % higher power density . however , the expected mass transport benefits in the high current density regime were constrained by high ohmic cell resistance , which could likely be resolved through future optimization studies . 
A liquid drop trapped in a microchannel , in which both contact angle ( wettability ) and opening angle ( geometry ) can vary with position , is investigated based on the minimization of free energy . the calculus of variation yields the young - laplace equation and its further integration leads to the general force balance . the equilibrium position of the trapped drop is determined by the balance between the area - mean capillary force and the area - mean hydrostatic pressure difference . trapped liquid drops in truncated cones and hyperboloids are studied to elucidate our theory . As the volume of the drop trapped in the hydrophilic cones is increased , four regimes separated by three critical volumes are identified . the drop is either trapped at the narrow end or away from the cone top . the solution at the cone top satisfies the force balance by adjusting the upper contact angle , which is experimentally observed and verified by surface evolver ( SE ) simulations . multiple stable states can exist in a particular regime . the hyperboloid tube in which the opening angle varies with position is also considered . As the gravitational strength is increased in hydrophilic hyperboloid , four regimes separated by three critical gravitational strengths are identified . the drop is either trapped near the neck or below the neck . unlike hydrophilic cones , the drop stays near the neck of the hyperboloid due to varying opening angles . multiple stable states are also observed . for both cone and hyperboloid , hydrophobic cases are studied as well and all theoretical solutions of the force balance agree well with SE simulation outcomes . 
surfactants are commonly used in droplet - based microfluidics to stabilize the droplet interface . In this study , we investigate the effect of insoluble surfactant on drop formation in a capillary microfluidic device . we use a diffuse - interface method to describe the evolution of interface involving insoluble surfactant . the navier - stokes / cahn - hilliard equations and the surfactant conservation equation are solved by a finite element method along with a grid deformation method . As the surfactant has a non-uniform distribution during the drop formation in general , the surface tension has a gradient on the interface , which affects the flow field and interface evolution . the surfactant effect is discussed for dripping and jetting regimes . 
the viscosity of an active suspension of E. coli bacteria is determined experimentally as a function of the shear rate using a y-shaped microfluidic channel . from the relative suspension viscosity , we identify rheological thickening and thinning regimes as well as situations at low shear rate where the viscosity of the bacteria suspension can be lower than the viscosity of the suspending fluid . In addition , bacteria concentration and velocity profiles in the bulk are directly measured in the microchannel . 
motivated by recent experiments , we numerically study the droplet traffic in microfluidic channels forming an asymmetric loop with a long and a short arm . the loop is connected to an inlet and an outlet channel by two right angled t-junctions . assuming flat channels , we employ the boundary element method ( BEM ) to numerically solve the two - dimensional darcy equation that governs two phase flow in the hele - shaw limit . the occurrence of different sorting regimes is summarized in sorting diagrams in terms of droplet size , distance between consecutive droplets in the inlet channel , and loop asymmetry for mobility ratios of the liquid phases larger and smaller than one . for large droplet distances , the traffic is regulated by the ratio of the total hydraulic resistances of the long and short arms . At high droplet densities and below a critical droplet size , droplet - droplet collisions are observed for both mobility ratios . 
this paper describes the fabrication of pressure - driven , open - channel microfluidic systems with lateral dimensions of 45-300 microns carved in omniphobic paper using a craft - cutting tool . vapor phase silanization with a fluorinated alkyltrichlorosilane renders paper omniphobic , but preserves its high gas permeability and mechanical properties . when sealed with tape , the carved channels form conduits capable of guiding liquid transport in the low - reynolds number regime ( i.e. laminar flow ) . these devices are compatible with complex fluids such as droplets of water in oil . the combination of omniphobic paper and a craft cutter enables the development of new types of valves and switches , such as " fold valves " and " porous switches , " which provide new methods to control fluid flow . 
droplet - based microfluidic systems enable a variety of biomedical applications from point - of - care diagnostics with third world implications , to targeted therapeutics alongside medical ultrasound , to molecular screening and genetic testing . though these systems maintain the key advantage of precise control of the size and composition of the droplet as compared to conventional methods of production , the low rates at which droplets are produced limits translation beyond the laboratory setting . As well , previous attempts to scale up shear - based microfluidic systems focused on increasing the volumetric throughput and formed large droplets , negating many practical applications of emulsions such as site - specific therapeutics . we present the operation of a parallel module with eight flow - focusing orifices in the dripping regime of droplet formation for the generation of uniform fine droplets at rates in the hundreds of kilohertz . elevating the capillary number to access dripping , generation of monodisperse droplets of liquid perfluoropentane in the parallel module exceeded <nUm> × <nUm> droplets per second , or <nUm> × <nUm> droplets per hour , at a mean diameter of <nUm> mm . our microfluidic method offers a novel means to amass uniform fine droplets in practical amounts , for instance , to satisfy clinical needs , with the potential for modification to form massive amounts of more complex droplets . 
the proceedings contain <nUm> papers . the special focus in this conference is on microelectronics and materials , applied chemistry and chemical engineering , information technology , computer engineering and network technology , environmental science and management engineering . the topics include : template synthesis and electrocatalytic properties of palladium hollow spheres ; synthesis and characterization of ferrous tungstate nanoparticles ; chemical methods for synthesizing gold nanoparticles ; synthesis and characterization of triethanolamine borate ; hydrophobic flexible silica aerogels felts fabricated by ambient pressure drying ; the synthesis and purification of 4-Dimethylamino-N-Methyl -4-Stilbazolium tosylate ; optimization of reaction conditions for preparing carboxymethyl cellulose guaze ; aromatic components analysis of HongDao clam by HS - SPME and GC - MS ; the influence of auxiliary chemicals on the decolorization of reactive blue dye by laccase ; electrochemical synthesis of platinum - reduced graphene oxide hybrids for methanol oxidation ; epitaxial graphene growth on 6H-SiC ( 0001 ) substrate by confinement controlled sublimation of silicon carbide ; characterization and investigation of polyamide <nUm> nanotubes prepared by a novel solution wetting method ; a comparative study of UHMWPE multifilament and aramid multifilament ; avoidance test for the assessment of microbial degradation of PAHs ; mechanism of the oxidation of iron ; synthesis of viscosity - variable diverting - acid main agent and diverting performance evaluation ; hot deformation behavior and microstructure of LiU720 alloy ; defects in germanium nanocrystals produced by ion implantation ; effect of graphite degradation on thermal analysis cooling curve of ductile iron melt ; grain growth behaviour of superalloy LiU720 under continuous heating conditions ; crystal growth and optical spectroscopy of ytterbium - doped lutetium orthophosphate ; first - principle calculations for magnetism of Mn - doped graphene ; ADP single crystal growth from solution in defined crystallographic direction ; first - principle study on magnetic properties of TM - doped 6H-SiC ; motion analysis of powder particle in plasma jet ; study on moisture transfer properties of polyester - cotton fabric ; the tensile and surface frictional property of soybean protein fibers ; test and analysis of SPF pure yarn or SPF tencel blending yarn mechanics property ; the mechanical property of milk protein fiber pure yarn and blended yarn ; a study of wearabilities of softwarm heating warm fiber fabric ; performance of newdal blended knitted fabrics ; study on properties of blended fabrics containing phenolic fiber ; research on aerodynamic characteristics of lateral jet control technology ; research on aerodynamic characteristics of morphing aircraft with a telescopic wing ; analysis and optimization of plastic parts moldflow based on mold flow ; fault diagnosis of drilling process based on rough set and support vector machine ; application of magnetic flux feedback control in hybrid suspension system ; fast tool servo driven by electromagnetic force applied in freeform surfaces machining ; study on marine diesel engine waste heat recovery system with multi-stage flash ; pressure drop and apparent solids concentration inside a novel multi-regime riser ; study on the buckling analysis of stiffened spherical shallow shell for gasholder roof ; kinematic analysis of lunar exploration manipulator ; application of fault tree analysis method in gas explosion accident ; the calibration of piezoelectric phase - shifter based on the improved 2-D FTP ; the design of an automatic golf collection robot ; fatigue life of UAV airframe based on damage coefficient ; new blind adaptive channel estimation schemes based on OFDM systems ; new channel estimation schemes for MIMO - OFDM systems ; a design of controller about LED landscape lamp ; autonomous marine monitoring system based on energy convertor ; the design of fish tank thermostat controller based on TC89C52 ; realization of the optimization of dijkstra algorithm in vehicle navigation ; automatic PID temperature control of thermoelectric cooler based on MSP430 ; design and implementation of mid-frequency magnetron sputtering power supply based on TL494 and MCU ; the trust relay QKD network communication research ; simulation research on instantaneous control in battery energy storage system ; the design of a rubik 's cube robot ; innovative teaching research on the course of intelligent control system and simulation ; design of intelligent flushing system ; design and production of AT89S52 microcontroller tachometer ; the design of warehouse temperature and humidity monitoring system ; decoupling suspension controller based on magnetic flux feedback ; development research on cloud application program based on GFS ; combining two detectors for object tracking ; solvent extraction of uranium by laminar flow in microfluidic chips ; research on non-manifold polyhedron from function - to - form mapping ; depth from defocus using geometric optics regularization ; image classification base on sparse representation with basis design ; computer simulation of complex consecutive reaction kinetics ; uniform blow-up rate for diffusion equation with a weighted localized source ; image stereo matching based on multi-scale plane set ; a novel image contrast restoration algorithm for fog ; bayesian estimation of gold index 's change point of time series model ; accelerating PQMRCGSTAB algorithm on xeon phi ; sampling theorems of wavelet subspaces with m band in higher dimensions ; application of three - dimensional modelling in the study of complex geological body ; gauss - newton iteration estimation to the parameters in nonlinear regression models ; study on a rapid real - time feature extraction algorithm ; using excel to evaluate shear strength parameters of soil ; neuron classification based on semi-supervised FCM algorithm ; a novel differentiate weight algorithm on heterogeneous network selection ; efficient dynamic data possession checking in cloud computing ; research of state - base object - oriented software testing ; self - revised opinion leader list construction and influence analysis ; cloud computing security analysis and reinforcement of hadoop environment ; symmetric multiwavelet frames with general lattice ; a robust image watermarking algorithm based on PCA and NN ; flight control system for UAV based on simulink ; distributed construction for power aware connected dominating set ; analysis of the process of collapse in supervision control systems ; ScanSAR mode sea ice image segmentation ; reviews and a new angle of β coefficient prediction method ; study on the property management problems and its countermeasures in small city of china ; performance evaluation of private college teachers based on analytic hierarchy process ( AHP ) ; empirical research on roof reclamation by land - lost farmers in peri-urban areas of china ; the analysis of a shares logistics enterprises ' financing structure ; research on improved shapley value based profit allocation of agricultural supply chain ; application of intelligent decision support system in enterprise management ; on the feasibility of introducing commercial insurance into major sports events ; effect of china 's commercial banks ' diversified revenue on performance ; optimal pricing problem of a closed - loop supply chain with remanufacturing ; research on impcact of interest rate marketization to SME financing ; study of energy - saving reform in garment production enterprises ; the reliability evaluation of power system based on uncertain linguistic information ; the synthesis of cephalosporin intermediates THZ ; studies on the biological characteristics of termitomyces albuminosus hypha ; forecasting by applying the time series model ; effects of water - soluble dietary fiber to wheat dough rheological properties ; stress emotion recognition based on RSP and EMG signals ; predictive efficiency comparison of ARIMA-time-series and the grey system GM(1,1) the expression of decoy receptor <nUm> in peripheral blood monocytes of rheumatoid arthritis patient ; study on the function of miRNA - <nUm> target using bioinformatics methods ; the application of neural network in the bionic control system of an artificial heart based on neuroshell ; effect of adding seeds during maceration on quality of wine from vitis vinifera CV . cabernet sauvignon ; a epidemic model with inhomogeneity and mobility based on cellular automata ; study on the degumming process of abelmoschus manihot ( L . ) medik by microwave - assisted treatment ; graphene modified molecular imprinted electrochemical sensor for specific recognition of bovine serum albumin ; removal of silica bodies on oil palm empty fruit bunch surfaces and application for biogas production ; environment pollutant standard : the production planning within certain pollution ; bioavailability of vanadium in alfalfa in V-Cd contaminated soil ; applying AHP and maximal value normalization to evaluate intensity of urban land use in sujiatun district , shenyang city ; analysis of agarwood waste at different pre-treatment for silica xerogel production ; applying ecological niche suitability model to evaluate land - use fitness ; study on environmentally - friendly snow - melting agents application ; classification and prediction of economic losses - storm surge disasters in guangdong province of china ; influence of rainfall infiltration on landslide treatment engineering ; preliminary study of groundwater pollution about sewage irrigation at malong county ; review of key technique research on the field of vegetation restoration in beach wetlands and the research of decentralized wastewater treatment mode in rural areas in china . 
In order to offer the ability of smaller volumes and high throughput in lab - on - a - chip and micro total analysis systems devices , more miniaturized components are needed . due to a low reynolds number on the microscale , the mixing process can be particularly troublesome . this problem is compounded by the fact that more miniaturization can be challenging in a microfluidic system . In such a case , electroosmotic ( EO ) force is an efficient force to perturb low reynolds number fluid . In this paper , a novel Micro-Electro-Mechanical-Systems ( MEMS ) based fabrication for microfluidic devices , and a more miniaturized micromixer are presented . the proposed technology process requires the covering of excited electrode patterns by a thin silicon - nitride ( NSi3 <nUm> ) insulator layer . fabrication parameters such as low pressure chemical vapor deposition ( LPCVD ) N4Si3 deposition effect , and height of the phosphor silicate glass ( PSG ) sacrificial layer were investigated for the electroosmotically - driven mixer . particle tracing for fluid flow was illustrated , the particles were stretched and folded for a long time , which was a proof of chaotic regime . finite element analysis ( FEA ) revealed that the mixer with covered electrodes provides the high mixing efficiency of above <nUm> % for a <nUm> mm long microchannel . using a silicon nitride insulator layer reduces high electric field gradient at sharp corners and edges of the electrodes , leading to the elimination of unwanted electrolyte effects . thus , the excitation and geometrical parameters were optimized for the micromixer . 
we investigate the transport of periodic trains of droplets through microfluidic networks having one inlet , one outlet , and nodes consisting of T junctions . variations of the dilution of the trains , i.e. , the distance between drops , reveal the existence of various hydrodynamic regimes characterized by the number of preferential paths taken by the drops . As the dilution increases , this number continuously decreases until only one path remains explored . building on a continuous approach used to treat droplet traffic through a single asymmetric loop , we determine selection rules for the paths taken by the drops and we predict the variations of the fraction of droplets taking these paths with the parameters at play including the dilution . our results show that as dilution decreases , the paths are selected according to the ascending order of their hydrodynamic resistance in the absence of droplets . the dynamics of these systems controlled by time - delayed feedback is complex : we observe a succession of periodic regimes separated by a wealth of bifurcations as the dilution is varied . In contrast to droplet traffic in single asymmetric loops , the dynamical behavior in networks of loops is sensitive to initial conditions because of extra degrees of freedom . 
viscoelastic surfactant - laden droplets were generated in silicone oil using a microfluidic t-junction channel device and the droplets dynamics was studied . surfactant can greatly lower the interfacial tension between the continuous phase fluid and the dispersed phase fluid , and also introduces elasticity to the aqueous solution . the droplets in the confined microchannel experience a steady shear by the continuous phase flow , showing distinct morphological evolvement from those under normal magnitude of interfacial tension and newtonian fluid nature . it is found that under very low interfacial tension droplet fragmentation ( or tail streaming ) composing of tiny satellites occurs at the rear of droplet ( or upstream of droplet ) . the production of tails seems to depend on the combination of the capillary number ( Ca ) , flow rate ratio and fluid elasticity ( described by weissenberg number , wi ) . this phenomenon demonstrates a new flow regime for aqueous micro-droplets which covered by mobilized , soluble surfactant , indicating such a tail streaming concerns not only the fluid dynamical process , but the properties of the dispersed phase fluid . 
mixing of liquids in micro mixers at low reynolds numbers is a challenging task since the flow regime is laminar and it is difficult to engage instabilities of the flow . In many microfluidic systems , mixing can be improved by means of electrokinetic effects . A favorable micro mixer design consists of a y-junction , where the different liquid streams merge , and a subsequent meandering microchannel . A pressure gradient pumps the liquids to be mixed through the microchannel . an oscillating electrical field is superimposed onto the pressure - driven base flow which generates an additional electrokinetic ( electro osmotic ) flow . these oscillating secondary flows in conjunction with the meandering geometry are responsible for stretching and folding of the contact area of the liquids to be mixed which enhances the mass transfer rates considerably . In this contribution , we present a mathematical model which allows for the numerical simulation of flow , electrical potential , and species concentration . the model is validated by experiments relying on micro particle image velocimetry ( mPIV ) . consequently , this model can be used to numerically optimize the electrical field in order to achieve fast and high mixing even at low reynolds numbers . 
monodisperse microdroplets are formed , when a liquid is injected through a micropore into another immiscible liquid . depending on the relative flow between the two phases , droplets may form in quiescent , coflowing and crossflowing environment . the dispersions of one phase liquid in another crossflowing liquid are observed in liquid emulsification process and the system has been used extensively in microfluidic devices to produce monodisperse microdroplets with controllable size . liquid emulsions are widely used in food , cosmetics , pharmaceutics and polymer industries . In the present work , microdroplet formation in a crossflow membrane emulsification process has been investigated computationally using VOF / finite volume method . the full transient simulation has been carried out starting from the injection of dispersed phase to breakup into drops for different values of dispersed phase and continuous phase flow rate , surface tension and viscosity ratio of both the phases . depending upon the values of the both phases , the droplet formation process shows the dripping and jetting behavior . the qualitative features of the two regimes and their transition have been correlated with different non-dimensional numbers such as capillary number , weber number and viscosity ratio of the two phase liquids . some interesting nonlinear behavior such as period doubling been observed near the transition between the dripping and jetting regimes has . the topological characteristics of dripping , jetting and transition regimes in membrane emulsification have been observed different than in the cases of t-junction emulsification and flow focusing emulsification . two ways of dripping to jetting transition have been observed , one with the increasing dispersed phase flow rate at constant continuous phase flow rate and other way is reducing the surface tension at constant dispersed phase flow rate . the effect of inertia force has been observed negligible for high value of surface tension and significant for lower surface tension value . 
an experimental system for understanding the flow field near the meniscus during the capillarity or under capillary action is developed . capillary flow is one of the mechanisms for driving fluid in a microfluidic device . the literature highlights that a significant amount of work has been done on the theoretical understanding of the capillary transport in rectangular microchannels . however , these models for capillary flow neglect the flow behavior at the liquid - air interface , which may have a significant influence in terms of the velocity field and the transience of the penetration depth in the micro-capillary . the objective of the present study is to understand the flow development during the advancement of the meniscus . the aim is to elucidate the dynamics of the three phase contact line and other microscale effects during the capillarity . A m- PIV technique has been used to study the flow development near the meniscus and the results are further refined using a hybrid m-PIV / PTV technique . effects of surface tension in the fully developed flow regime during the advancement of meniscus are studied in detail . variations in the centreline velocity of the progression of the meniscus and temporal variations in the development of flow are identified as possible areas for departure from theory . 
flow in microchannels is an important area of research in engineering because its importance in areas such as micromachinery . In addition , hydrophobic materials have become increasingly attractive for use in fabrication of microfluidic devices . however , even when in macroscopic flows the nonslip boundary condition on solid wall has been well accepted , a number of recent studies have found evidences of slip velocities for liquid flow on hydrophobic surface . In this study , numerical simulations of two - phase flow of micro-droplet in a continuous base fluid in a 2D microchannel were performed using a commercial software package . both slip and non-slip flows were considered . continuous phase slip over wall channels was considered modeling all range of possible knudsen numbers . three drops of different sizes were modeled . results were expressed in term of pressure drop and reynolds numbers . droplet interface deformation and velocity fields inside both droplets and continuous phase were determined . results show that for knudsen numbers between <nUm> and <nUm> , reynolds number increases in a proportion in the order of <nUm> % . In addition pressure drop notably increase when large drops are considered . 
the utilization of cross-stream diffusion under laminar flow for precise analyte handling plays a critical role in microfluidic biochemical assays such as sample preparation , concentration gradient generation , and molecular interactions . the nonuniform velocity profile along the cross-section of a rectangular microchannel with arbitrary aspect ratio under pressure - driven flow results in unique , heterogeneous species transport including taylor dispersion and position - dependent diffusion scaling law . although numerical methods such as finite difference method , finite element method , the method of lines and lattice boltzmann ( LB ) method have been used for quantitative study of the phenomena , they inherently suffer from several limitations , such as difficulty to provide direct , physical insight into the underlying transport mechanism and prohibitive computational cost to suppress the artificial numerical diffusion ( ND ) . to address these issues , several analytical models have been proposed , which share several common assumptions such as large aspect ratio and neglecting depth-wise diffusion due to the non-uniform axial velocity in the 3D convection - diffusion equation , markedly limiting their utility . In this paper , we present a three dimensional ( 3D ) analytical model to investigate the diffusion of analyte between two cross streams in rectangular microchannels with arbitrary aspect ratios under pressure - driven flow . the 3D convectiondiffusion equation is solved in a fourier series form using a double integral transformation method and associated eigensystem calculation . therefore , the model for the first time is capable of capturing the non-uniform transport rate ( i.e. , the ' butterfly effect ' ) and the position - dependent scaling - law of diffusion ( <nUm> / 3-power at the channel wall and <nUm> / 2-pwer at the half - depth plane ) through an analytical solution . our analytical model was extensively validated against both experimental and numerical data in terms of the concentration distribution , diffusion scaling law and the mixing efficiency with excellent agreement ( the relative error is much less than <nUm> % in various benchmark test cases . ) quantitative comparison between our analytical model and other prior analytical models in extensive parameter space was also performed , which convincingly demonstrates that our model accommodates much broader transport regimes and more practical microfluidic applications . 
flow - focusing microfluidic devices ( FFMDs ) have been reported to produce monodisperse microbubbles with tunable diameters determined by device geometry and input flow / pressure conditions . however , no model for microbubble production rate has yet been reported . In this paper , we develop a model describing the production rate of monodisperse spherical microbubbles from planar two - dimensional PDMS - based expanding - nozzle FFMDs as a function of gas pressure and liquid flow rate . high speed optical microscopy was used to determine the diameter and production rate . microbubble generation was observed to occur in five discrete regimes . within the spherical monodisperse regime , the generation cycle was characterized by two phases : bubbling and waiting . the generation cycle was found to be inversely proportional to liquid flow rate for a fixed gas pressure . excellent agreement was found between predicted and measured microbubble production rate ( R2 = <nUm> ) . 
we investigate the preconcentration profiles of a fluorescein and bovine serum albumin derivatized with this fluorescent tag in a microfluidic chip bearing a nanoslit . A new preconcentration method in which a hydrodynamic pressure is added to both electroosmotic and electrophoretic contributions is proposed to monitor the location of the preconcentration frontline . A simple predictive model of this pressure - assisted electropreconcentration is proposed for the evolution of the flow profile along this micro / nano / microfluidic structure . we show with a small analyte such as fluorescein that the additional hydrostatic pressure mode enables to stabilize the concentration polarization ( CP ) effect , resulting in better control of the cathodic focusing ( CF ) peak . for BSA ( bovine serum albumin ) , we exhibit that the variation of the hydrodynamic pressure can have an even more drastic effect on the preconcentration . we show that , depending on this hydrodynamic pressure , the preconcentration can be chosen , either in the cathodic side or in the anodic one . for the first time , we prove here that both anodic focusing ( AF ) and cathodic focusing ( CF ) regimes can be reached in the same structures . these results also open new routes for the detection and the quantification of low abundance biomarkers . 
microfluidics is changing the way modern biology is performed and is becoming a key technology in the field of micro arrays , DNA sequencing , and lab on a chip applications . microsystems , being compact in size , disposable , and ensuring high speed of analysis using decreased sample volumes , allow to replace large - scale conventional laboratory instrumentation with miniaturized devices , reducing hardware costs , and assuring low reagent consumption and faster analysis . At the microscale mixing of species becomes crucial to i ) improve the effectiveness of and ii ) speed up chemical reactions , but it is often critical to be achieved , since microfluidics is characterized mainly by very low reynolds flows , and can not take advantage of turbulence in order to enhance mixing . hence , given that diffusion - driven mixing in very low reynolds number flow regimes is characterized by long time scales , methods for enhancing the rate of the mixing process are essential in microfluidics . In order to enhance mixing , several techniques have been developed . In general , mixing strategies can be classified as either active or passive , according to the operational mechanism . active mixers employ external forces in order to perform mixing , so that actuation system must be embedded into the microchips . on the contrary , passive mixers avoid resorting to external electrical or mechanical sources by exploiting characteristics of specific flow fields in microchannel geometries to mix species , offering the advantage to be easy to be produced and integrated . In this work , a survey of the passive micromixing solutions currently adopted is presented . In detail , the most widely used microchannel geometries and the metrics used to quantify mixing effectiveness in microfluidic applications are discussed . 
A recently developed microfluidic device , the optimized shape cross-slot extensional rheometer or OSCER [ S . J. haward , m . S . N. oliveira , m . A. alves , and g . H. McKinley , " optimized cross-slot flow geometry for microfluidic extensional rheometry , " phys. rev. lett.109 , <nUm> (2012)10.1103 / PhysRevLett.109.128301 ] , is used to investigate the stability of viscoelastic polymer solutions in an idealized planar stagnation point flow . aqueous polymer solutions , consisting of poly(ethylene oxide ) and of hyaluronic acid with various molecular weights and concentrations , are formulated in order to provide fluids with a wide range of rheological properties . semi-dilute solutions of high molecular weight polymers provide highly viscoelastic fluids with long relaxation times , which achieve a high weissenberg number ( wi ) at flow rates for which the reynolds number ( Re ) remains low ; hence the elasticity number el = wi / Re is high . lower concentration solutions of moderate molecular weight polymers provide only weakly viscoelastic fluids in which inertia remains important and el is relatively low . flow birefringence observations are used to visualize the nature of flow instabilities in the fluids as the volumetric flow rate through the OSCER device is steadily incremented . At low wi and Re , all of the fluids display a steady , symmetric , and uniform " birefringent strand " of highly oriented polymer molecules aligned along the outflowing symmetry axis of the test geometry , indicating the stability of the flow field under such conditions . In fluids of el > <nUm> , we observe steady elastic flow asymmetries beyond a critical weissenberg number,Wicrit , that are similar in character to those already reported in standard cross-slot geometries [ e.g. , P . E. arratia , C . C. thomas , J. diorio , and J . P. gollub , " elastic instabilities of polymer solutions in cross-channel flow , " phys. rev. lett.96 , <nUm> (2006)10.1103 / PhysRevLett.96.144502 ] . however , in fluids with el < <nUm> we observe a sequence of time - dependent inertio-elastic instabilities beyond a critical reynolds number , recrit , characterized by high frequency spatiotemporal oscillations of the birefringent strand . by plotting the critical limits of stability for the various fluids in the Wi-Re operating space , we are able to construct a stability diagram delineating the distinct steady symmetric , steady asymmetric and inertio-elastic flow regimes in this idealized planar elongational flow device . 
we present the first experimental demonstration of confined microfluidic droplets acting as discrete negative resistors , wherein the effective hydrodynamic resistance to flow in a microchannel is reduced by the presence of a droplet . the implications of this hitherto unexplored regime in the traffic of droplets in microfluidic networks are highlighted by demonstrating bistable filtering into either arm of symmetric and asymmetric microfluidic loops , and programming oscillatory droplet routing therein . 
the diverse and often complex dynamics of digital flows in microfluidic networks is of much current interest to the microfluidic community due to the wide range of applications facilitated by such flows . In this paper , we highlight a counterintuitive phenomenon in the traffic of bubble trains . we show how all bubbles of a train can be sorted exclusively into one of the arms of a symmetric loop by the simply increasing its speed beyond a threshold value . we find that this filter regime is accessed when bubbles lower the hydrodynamic resistance of microchannels , an interesting phenomenon in itself . 
we report on a microfluidic device and droplet formation regime capable of generating clinical - scale quantities of liquid perfluoropentane droplets suitable in size and functionality for gas embolotherapy . we examine three modes of droplet formation in our flow - focusing device - geometry - controlled , dripping , and jetting - then use the dripping regime to generate highly monodisperse droplets in the range of 3-6 mm in diameter at rates exceeding <nUm> droplets per second . the phasechange droplets in this study are stable for weeks at room temperature yet undergo rapid liquid - to - gas phase transition , and volume expansion , above a uniform activation threshold . 
A three - dimensional ( 3D ) simulation study of the effect of inertia on the dynamics of vesicles and red blood cells ( RBCs ) has not been reported . here , we developed a 3D model based on the front tracking method to investigate how inertia affects the dynamics of spherical / non-spherical vesicles and biconcave - shaped RBCs with the reynolds number ranging from <nUm> to <nUm> . the results showed that inertia induced non-spherical vesicles transitioned from tumbling to swinging , which was not observed in previous 2D models . the critical viscosity ratio of inner / outer fluids for the tumbling - swinging transition remarkably increased with an increasing reynolds number . the deformation of vesicles was greatly enhanced by inertia , and the frequency of tumbling and tank - treading was significantly decreased by inertia . we also found that RBCs can transit from tumbling to steady tank - treading through the swinging regime when the reynolds number increased from <nUm> to <nUm> . these results indicate that inertia needs to be considered at moderate reynolds number ( Re ∼ <nUm> ) in the study of blood flow in the human body and the flow of deformable particle suspension in inertial microfluidic devices . the developed 3D model provided new insights into the dynamics of RBCs under shear flow , thus holding great potential to better understand blood flow behaviors under normal / disease conditions . 
the constructal tree - shaped configuration was presented for the application of rapid mixing of fluids in the microchannel , inspired by the geometry of biological tissues . mixing characteristics of such configuration was investigated by computer simulation and was then supported experimentally . the navier - stokes equations were solved for the elementary t-junction structure , and three flow regimes were distinguished with the increase of reynolds numbers , namely stratified , vortex and engulfment regimes . due to the presence of secondary flow , the intertwinement of streamlines induced by the vortex flow causes decrease of the scale of segregation and the reduction of the diffusive distance in the mixing process . variations of concentration distributions and mixing efficiencies along the mixing channel and with reynolds number were analyzed and compared for the single , double , and triple t-shaped microchannels . the results showed that high mixing performance could be achieved even at relatively low reynolds number by using the constructal tree - shaped structure . furthermore , several tree - shaped microstructures were fabricated to conduct the verification experiments for numerical simulations . numerical and experimental investigations indicated that the constructal tree - shaped structure , which consists of a large number of multi-T channels , is an excellent configuration for the micromixing . 
this paper presents an in-plane pneumatically actuated membrane - type microvalve , entirely made of cyclic olefin polymer ( COP ) . the body of the valve is fabricated following a robust hot - embossing method with SU-8 master moulds , producing devices with repetitive dimensions at wafer - level . sealing is performed by applying a suitable solvent on the COP membrane , rendering monolithic devices , free from assembly errors . various design parameters have been studied to obtain different working regimes , with maximum flow rates of <nUm> ml / min being successfully regulated and fully stopped . owing to its fabrication method and characteristics , these devices represent a reliable and low - cost solution for the integration of microfluidic control in mass - produced lab - on - a - chip devices . 
A new electroanalytical method for the characterization of global antioxidant capacity is proposed based on chronoamperometric responses monitored at microchannel band electrodes . this approach does not require any titrating species , biological elements , or precalibration curves . A thin - layer regime is established at the working electrode according to the geometry of the device and hydrodynamic flow rate . under these conditions , the currents are directly proportional to the total concentration of antioxidants and do not depend on their respective diffusion coefficients . measurements were performed with synthetic solutions and mixtures of four antioxidants used as sample tests : trolox , ascorbic acid , gallic acid , and caffeic acid . operating potentials were selected at the formal potentials of some reactive oxygen species to simulate their oxidative attacks . the very good agreement obtained between simulations and experimental data validated this new electroanalytical procedure . these results pave the way for the concept of innovative sensor - type microfluidic devices for alternative determination of antioxidant capacity . 
we present an experimental comparative study of the effect of elasticity of the continuous liquid in generation of droplets in microfluidic flow focusing devices . for a wide range of values of dynamic viscosity of the newtonian droplet phase we compare the dynamics of the formation of droplets in three different newtonian and non-Newtonian , viscoelastic ( boger ) fluid pairs of the same ( and nearly constant ) shear viscosities . In both newtonian and viscoelastic systems we find similar regimes of operation of the system : ( i ) dripping without satellites , ( ii ) dripping with single satellites , ( iii ) formation of multiple satellites , and ( iv ) jetting . we find that the elasticity of the focusing liquid stabilizes the jets facilitating formation of smaller droplets , and leads to transitions between various regimes at lower ratios of flow and at lower values of the capillary numbers in comparison to the newtonian focusing liquids . we also show that the polydispersity of newtonian droplets produced in non-Newtonian continuous phases depend significantly on the viscosity of the droplet phase while this dependence is minor when the continuous liquid is newtonian . 
Low-Reynolds-number flows in cavities , characterized by separating and recirculating flows are increasingly used in microfluidic applications such as mixing and sorting of fluids , cells , or particles . however , there is still a lack of guidelines available for selecting the appropriate or optimized microcavity configuration according to the specific task at hand . In an effort to provide accurate design guidelines , we investigate quantitatively low-Reynolds-number cavity flow phenomena using a microfluidic screening platform featuring rectangular channels lined with cylindrical cavities . using particle image velocimetry ( PIV ) , supported by computational fluid dynamics ( CFD ) simulations , we map the entire spectrum of flows that exist in microcavities over a wide range of low - reynolds numbers ( Re = <nUm> , <nUm> , and <nUm> ) and dimensionless geometric parameters . comprehensive phase diagrams of the corresponding microcavity flow regimes are summarized , capturing the gradual transition from attached flow to a single vortex and crossing through two- and three - vortex recirculating systems featuring saddle - points . finally , we provide design insights into maximizing the rotational frequencies of recirculating single - vortex microcavity systems . overall , our results provide a complete and quantitative framework for selecting cavities in microfluidic - based microcentrifuges and vortex mixers . 
In microchannel , the pressure drop of liquid - liquid two - phase flow is of vital importance for intensifying heat and mass transfer of the flow system . In the present work , liquid - liquid two - phase flow in rectangular microchannels with two different aspect ratios ( <nUm> mm × <nUm> mm and <nUm> mm × <nUm> mm ) was recorded by using a high - speed camera , and the pressure drop under slug flow regime was measured by using a differential pressure sensor . the cyclohexane was used as the dispersed phase and distilled water with <nUm> % SDS(sodium lauryl sulfate ) as the continuous phase . the results show that the pressure drop increases with the increases of the flow rates of both phases , the capillary number Ca , the reynolds number Re and the viscosity of the continuous phase , and decreases with the increase of the velocity ratio of both phases . when Ca > <nUm> or Re > <nUm> , the pressure drop increases with the increase of the aspect ratio of the microchannel . A modified correlation for homogeneous flow model was proposed for predicting pressure drop under slug flow regime of liquid - liquid two - phase flow in microchannels , and the calculated results show good conformity to the experimental data . 
we propose a light sheet based imaging flow cytometry technique for simultaneous counting and imaging of cells on a microfluidic platform . light sheet covers the entire microfluidic channel and thus omits the necessity of flow focusing and point scanning based technology . another advantage lies in the orthogonal detection geometry that totally cuts - off the incident light , thereby substantially reducing the background in the detection . compared to the existing state - of - art techniques the proposed technique shows marked improvement . using fluorescently - coated saccharomyces cerevisiae cells we have recorded cell counting with throughput as high as <nUm> cells / min in the low flow rate regime and were able to image the individual cells on - the - go . overall , the proposed system is cost - effective and simple in channel geometry with the advantage of efficient counting in operational regime of low laminar flow . this technique may advance the emerging field of microfluidic based cytometry for applications in nanomedicine and point of care diagnostics . 
we analyse the steady - state convection - diffusion mixing of a solute by a creeping circulatory flow in a long sealed rectangular two - dimensional channel with impermeable sidewalls and fixed different solute concentrations at the two opposite edges . solution circulation is due to a constant velocity slip along the sidewalls and a back flow along the channel axis . this simple model distils the essence of circulation in concentration polarization of an electrolyte solution under a DC electric current in a micro-channel sealed by an ion - selective element ( a nano-channel or a cation exchange membrane ) . it is observed that in the slow circulation regime ( small pe numbers ) the solute flux through the channel is governed by the taylor - aris dispersion mechanism , i.e. the flux is driven by the cross-sectional average axial concentration gradient , whereas upon increase in pe this mechanism fails . the general question addressed is where the system goes after the breakdown of the taylor - aris dispersion regime . In order to find out the answer , the following specific questions have to be addressed . ( 1 ) how does the taylor - aris dispersion mechanism break down upon increase in pe ? ( 2 ) why does it break down ? ( 3 ) what is the role of the channel aspect ratio in this breakdown ? the answers to these questions are obtained through analysing a hierarchy of suitable auxiliary model problems , including the unidirectional zero discharge channel flow and the circulatory analogue of plane - parallel couette flow , for which most of the analysis is done . they may be summarized as follows . upon increase in circulation velocity , the taylor - aris dispersion mechanism fails due to the formation of lateral non-uniformities of longitudinal solute concentration gradient driving the dispersion flux . these non-uniformities accumulate in protrusion - like disturbances of the solute concentration ( wall fingers ) emerging near the channel sidewall at the flow exit from the edge . wall fingers propagate along the sidewalls with increase in pe and eventually reach the opposite channel edges , transforming into narrow surface convection layers . these layers , together with the edge diffusion layers , form a closed mass transport pattern carrying most of the mass flux through the channel with the bulk largely excluded from the transport . the formation of this pattern finalizes the transition from taylor - aris dispersion to the surface convection regime . for large circulation velocities , concentration distribution in the surface convection layers attains an oscillatory spiral structure reminiscent of thermal waves in heat conduction . 
low throughput is an inherent problem associated with most single - molecule biophysical techniques . we have developed a versatile tool for high - throughput analysis of DNA and DNA - binding molecules by combining microfluidic and dense DNA arrays . we use an easy - to - process microfluidic flow channel system in which dense DNA arrays are prepared for simultaneous imaging of large amounts of DNA molecules with single - molecule resolution . the y-shaped microfluidic design , where the two inlet channels can be controlled separately and precisely , enables the creation of a concentration gradient across the microfluidic channel as well as rapid and repeated addition and removal of substances from the measurement region . A DNA array stained with the fluorescent DNA - binding dye YOYO-1 in a gradient manner illustrates the method and serves as a proof of concept . we have applied the method to studies of the repair protein rad51 and could directly probe the concentration - dependent DNA - binding behavior of human rad51 ( HsRad51 ) . In the low - concentration regime used ( <nUm> nM HsRad51 and below ) , we detected binding to double - stranded DNA ( dsDNA ) without positive cooperativity . 
As global energy usage increases , maximizing oil recovery from known reserves becomes crucial to meet the rising demand . In this work , we present the development of a microfluidic sandstone platform capable of quickly and inexpensively testing the performance of fluids with different rheological properties on the recovery of oil . specifically , in this study we utilized these microfluidic devices to examine how shear - thinning , shear - thickening , and viscoelastic fluids affect oil recovery . initial baseline experiments were performed by displacing oil with both water and a water - surfactant solution over a wide range of flow rates . the surfactant was found to reduce the interfacial tension of the water by a factor of ten and increased oil recovery by approximately <nUm> % when compared to oil displaced by water at the same flow rates . flopaam , a commercially available fluid thickener that is shear - thinning and viscoelastic was also studied . it was found to displace more oil then either the water or the surfactant solution and increase oil recovery at all flow rates studied . finally , a shear - thickening nanoparticle solution was studied which was designed to thicken at a shear rate of approximately <nUm> s-1 . the shear rate corresponds to typical shear rates in the oil reservoirs , and values easily attainable in our microfluidic sandstone device . these shear - thickening fluids were found to be particularly effective at oil recovery . this was especially true for flowrates that closely matched the shear rates associated with the shear - thickening regime . when the appropriate choice of shear rate dependent viscosity was used to the capillary number , the oil recovery obtained from both the newtonian and non-Newtonian was found to collapse quite well onto a single master curve . additionally , it was shown that a two - stage recovery process that starts with an initial water flood followed by a flood with a secondary fluid can recover as much oil as a single stage recovery with that secondary fluid alone . these results clearly demonstrate that the microfluidic sandstone devices presented in this paper both reduce the time and cost required to investigate the effectiveness of enhanced oil recovery fluids using traditional methods , and can serve to quickly focus searches for customized oil recovery fluid selection . 
elastomeric microvalves in poly(dimethylsiloxane) ( PDMS ) devices are today 's paradigm for massively parallel microfluidic operations . here , we report that such valves can act as nanochannels upon closure . when tuning nanospace heights between ~ <nUm> nm and ~ <nUm> nm , the nanofluidic phenomenon of concentration polarization could be induced . A wide range of concentration polarization regimes ( anodic and cathodic analyte focusing and stacking ) was achieved simply by valve pressure actuation . electro-osmotic flow generated a counterpressure which also could be used to actuate between concentration polarization regimes . 1000-fold preconcentration of fluorescein was achieved in just <nUm> s in the anodic focusing regime . after valve opening , a concentrated sample plug could be transported through the valve , though at the cost of some defocusing . reversible nanochannels open new avenues for integrating electrokinetic operations and assays in large scale integrated microfluidics . 
ultrasound imaging often calls for the injection of contrast agents , micron - sized bubbles which echo strongly in blood and help distinguish vascularized tissue . such microbubbles are also being augmented for targeted drug delivery and gene therapy , by the addition of surface receptors and therapeutic payloads . unfortunately , conventional production methods yield a polydisperse population , whose nonuniform resonance and drug - loading are less than ideal . an alternative technique , microfluidic flow - focusing , is able to produce highly monodisperse microbubbles with stabilizing lipid membranes and drug - carrying oil layers . however , the published <nUm> kHz production rate for these uniform drug bubbles is very low compared to conventional methods , and must be improved before clinical use can be practical . In this study , flow - focusing production of oil - layered lipid microbubbles was tested up to <nUm> kHz , with coalescence suppressed by high lipid concentrations or inclusion of pluronic F68 surfactant in the lipid solution . the transition between geometry - controlled and dripping production regimes was analysed , and production scaling was found to be continuous , with a power trend of exponent ~ <nUm> / <nUm> similar to literature . unlike prior studies with this trend , however , scaling curves here were found to be pressure - dependent , particularly at lower pressure - flow equilibria ( e.g. < <nUm> psi ) . adjustments in oil flow rate were observed to have a similar effect , akin to a pressure change of 1-3 psi . this analysis and characterization of high - speed dual - layer bubble generation will enable more - predictive production control , at rates practical for in vivo or clinical use . 
the fabrication of glass capillary microfluidic devices is technically challenging , often hampering use of the design . we describe a new technique , based on commercially available components , for assembling flow focusing capillary devices that can readily be taken apart and cleaned between uses . this design strategy allows for generation of both water - in - oil and oil - in - water emulsions in the same device after an ethanol rinse . the modularity of the device enables the adjustment of the tip separation between the two inner capillaries during droplet generation , which enables tuning of the age of the interface . time - dependent surfactant diffusion to the interface changes the interfacial tension , thus providing an approach for adjusting the capillary number in addition to the usual method of changing flow rates . this design enables the tuning of the mode of breakup and the droplet size . 
we examine the initial dynamical behavior of dissolving microbubbles composed of carbon dioxide gas in highly viscous silicone oils over a range of flow rates and pressure conditions . microfluidic periodic trains of CO <nUm> bubbles are used to probe the interrelation between bubble dissolution and high - viscosity multiphase flows in microgeometries . we investigate bubble morphology from low to large capillary numbers and calculate the effective mass diffusion flux across the interface by tracking and monitoring individual bubbles during shrinkage . the initial flux is characterized using a dissolution coefficient that reveals the influence of the oil molecular weight on the dissolution process . our findings show the possibility to control and exploit the interplay between capillary and mass transfer phenomena with highly viscous fluids in small - scale systems . 
microfluidic mixing devices are increasingly popular tools for probing the non-equilibrium dynamics of biomolecular systems . commonly , hydrodynamic focusing is used to reduce the length scales that limit the time of diffusive mixing in the laminar flow regime , such that even sub-millisecond dead times for triggering a reaction have been achieved . detection of a suitable signal at different points along the channel downstream of the mixing region , corresponding to different times after mixing , then allows the kinetics of the reaction to be obtained . however , the requisite accurate conversion of the positions in the channel to times after mixing is complicated by taylor dispersion , the combined effect of diffusion and shear flow on the dispersion of the molecules in the microfluidic device . As a result , an accurate position - to - time conversion has only been possible in the limiting regimes , i.e. for very early times , where sample diffusion can be neglected , and for very long times , where the molecules have uniformly sampled the entire channel cross-section . here , we use detailed three - dimensional , time - dependent finite - element calculations to obtain an accurate position - to - time conversion that bridges these two limits and allows us to quantify the effects of taylor dispersion on the time resolution of a representative mixing device optimized for single - molecule fluorescence detection . the accuracy of the calculations is confirmed by direct comparison of the calculated velocity field with dual - focus fluorescence correlation spectroscopy measurements . 
we discuss the design , implementation and performance of a novel platform for the production and optical control of ultra-low interfacial tension droplets in the 1-10 micron regime . A custom - designed , integrated microfluidic system allows the production of oil - in - water emulsion droplets of controllable size . this provides an optimised physical platform in which individual droplets are selected , trapped and shaped by holographic optical tweezers ( HOTs ) via extended optical landscaping . the 3D structure of the shaped droplet is interrogated by a combination of conventional brightfield imaging and fluorescent structured - illumination sectioning . we detail the problems and limitations of closedloop holographic control of droplet shape . 
the combination of microarray technologies with microfluidic sample delivery and real - time detection methods has the capability to simultaneously monitor 10-1000. s of biomolecular interactions in a single experiment . despite the benefits that microfluidic systems provide , they typically operate in the laminar flow regime under mass transfer limitations , where large analyte depletion layers act as a resistance to analyte capture . by locally stirring the fluid and delivering fresh analyte to the capture spot , the use of passive mixing structures in a microarray environment can reduce the negative effects of these depletion layers and enhance the sensor performance . despite their large potential , little attention has been given to the integration of these mixing structures in microarray sensing environments . In this study , we use passive mixing structures to enhance the mass transfer of analyte to a capture spot within a microfluidic flow cell . using numerical methods , different structure shapes and heights were evaluated as means to increase local fluid velocities , and in turn , rates of mass transfer to a capture spot . these results were verified experimentally via the real - time detection of 20-mer ssDNA for an array of microspots . both numerical and experimental results showed that a passive mixing structure situated directly over the capture spot can significantly enhance the binding rate of analyte to the sensing surface . moreover , we show that these structures can be used to enhance mass transfer in experiments regarding an array of capture spots . the results of this study can be applied to any experimental system using microfluidic sample delivery methods for microarray detection techniques . 
the present work is related to the study of the pressure driven isothermal gas flows through different microchannel configurations such as short straight micro-channels , <nUm> bend channels and t-shaped junctions . the direct simulation monte carlo ( DSMC ) method is used to calculate the gas flow through channel configurations in order to distinguish the flow regimes taking place in long and short microchannels . all the simulations were carried out in three dimensions but some of obtained results concern two dimensional configurations . In this case , the third dimension is confined between two specularly reflecting walls so that the flow in the third direction to be homogeneous . implicit boundary conditions were applied to maintain a given pressure at inlet and outlet ( I / O ) boundaries . for small knudsen number gas flow , the DSMC results are compared to the continuum numerical solution of the Navier-Stokes-Fourier equations obtained by using SIMPLE-TS finite volume method . 
the decoupled effects of reynolds and dean numbers are examined in inertial focusing flows . In doing so , a complex set of inertial focusing behavioral regimes is discovered within curved microfluidic channels over a range of channel reynolds numbers , curvature ratios and particle confinement ratios . these regimes are characterized by particle migration either towards or away from the center of curvature as the channel reynolds number is increased . the transition between these two regimes is shown to be a set of conditions where single - point equilibrium position focusing of particles of different sizes is achieved . A mechanism describing the observed motion of particles in such flows is hypothesized incorporating the redistribution of the main flow velocities caused by dean flow and its effect on the balance forces on suspended particles . 
microparticle adsorption on microchannel walls occurs frequently due to nonspecific interactions , decreasing operational performance in pressure - driven microfluidic systems . however , it is essential for delicate manipulation of microparticles or cells to maintain smooth fluid traffic . here , we report a novel microparticle injection technique , which prevents particle loss , assisted by sample injection along the direction of fluid flow . sample fluids , including microparticles , mammalian ( U937 ) , and green algae ( chlorella vulgaris ) cells , were injected directly via a through hole drilled in the lateral direction , resulting in a significant reduction in microparticle attachment . for digital microfluidic application , the proposed regime achieved a twofold enhancement of single - cell encapsulation compared to the conventional encapsulation rate , based on a poisson distribution , by reducing the number of empty droplets . this novel interconnection method can be straightforwardly integrated as a microparticle or cell injection component in integrated microfluidic systems . 
the formation of droplets at a t-junction in a microchannel network is primarily influenced by the pressure difference across the interface in the squeezing regime . accurate measurements of droplet velocity and pressure profiles are difficult to obtain experimentally , yet these are the basic parameters required for understanding the physics governing the droplet formation process and for shaping the optimum design of microfluidic devices . the current work presents predictions from two dimensional numerical simulations of microdroplet generation at a t-junction . the simulation results are validated with the experimental observations . detailed profiles of the predicted pressure evolution across the channel upstream of the t-junction indicate that the pressure variation is sensitive to small changes in the wetting properties of the continuous phase . 
hypothesis : droplet size in microfluidic devices is affected by wettability of the microfluidic channels . three - dimensional countercurrent flow focusing using assemblies of chemically inert glass capillaries is expected to minimize wetting of the channel walls by the organic solvent . experiments : monodispersed polycaprolactone and poly(lactic acid ) particles with a diameter of 18-150. mm were produced by evaporation of solvent ( dichloromethane or <nUm> : <nUm> mixture of chloroform and toluene ) from oil - in - water or water - in - oil - in - water emulsions produced in three - dimensional flow focusing glass capillary devices . the drop generation behaviour was simulated numerically using the volume of fluid method . findings : the numerical results showed good agreement with high - speed video recordings . monodispersed droplets were produced in the dripping regime when the ratio of the continuous phase flow rate to dispersed phase flow rate was 5-20 and the weber number of the dispersed phase was less than <nUm> . the porosity of polycaprolactone particles increased from <nUm> to <nUm> % when <nUm> . wt % of the water phase was incorporated in the organic phase prior to emulsification . the inner water phase was loaded with <nUm> . wt % lidocaine hydrochloride to achieve a sustained drug release . <nUm> % of lidocaine was released after 1. h and more than <nUm> % of the drug was released after 130. h . 
microfluidic fuel cells ( mFFC ) are emerging as a promising solution for small - scale power demands . the t-shaped architecture of the mFFC promotes a laminar flow regimen between the catholyte and anolyte streams excluding the use of a membrane , this property allows a simplest design and the use of several micromachining techniques based on a lab - on - chip technologies . this work presents a combination of new materials and low cost fabrication processes to develop a light , small , flexible and environmental friendly device able to supply the energy demand of some portable devices . well - defined and homogeneous Pd nanocubes which exhibited the ( 100 ) preferential crystallographic plane were supported on vulcan carbon and used as anodic electrocatalyst in a novel and compact design of a SU-8 mFFC feeded with formic acid as fuel . the SU-8 photoresist properties and the organic microelectronic technology were important factors to reduce the dimensions of the mFFC structure . the results obtained from polarization and power density curves exhibited the highest power density ( <nUm> mW cm-2 ) reported in literature for direct formic acid mFFCs . 
biofilms can cause numerous problems , hence it is important to understand their formation on surfaces in order to develop resistant materials and avoidance strategies . therefore , information is required regarding adhesion processes on surfaces generally and innovative anti-adhesive coatings in particular . our flow cell system allows biofilms to be monitored in continuous flow conditions , without removing material for postflow imaging . the shown laminar flow ensures the maintenance of highly controlled conditions for biofilm growth . however , carried simulations of the oxygen demands of escherichia coli cultivated as biofilms under the chosen regime indicate that conditions may become anaerobic , at least at the outlet of the flow cell , after a certain period of time . we report data on the biofouling tendencies on coatings generated with the help of direct laser interference patterning on stainless steel surfaces . data were estimated from images acquired by fluorescence microscopy . differences between patterned and unpatterned surfaces were not found , which is in accordance with the attachment point theory . nevertheless , it is particularly important to elucidate in future studies the behavior of microorganisms during their attachment and the effects of variables of potentially sensitive surfaces ( such as hydrophobicity , nanotopography , and charge ) on their adhesion . 
we report a novel electrical control in droplet microfluidics using an ac electric field . the method can be used to actively control and tune the size of water - in - oil droplets formed in a microfluidic flow focusing device . electrodes fabricated using microsolidics technique are not in contact with the fluids and hence prevent undesirable electrochemical reactions . the proposed electrical control is able to change the size of the droplets in the order of millisecond and also to manipulate the size of the droplets formed at single droplet level through the change in applied voltages and signal . an electro-mediated droplet formation regime transition from dripping to jetting is also observed due to the changes in the maxwell stress arising from the application of the ac electric field . At applied frequency of between <nUm> to <nUm> kHz , the change in droplet sizes follow similar trend for the case of pure DI water but is different for the case of ClNa solution . 
investigation of fluid flow and heat transfer in rotating microchannels is important for centrifugal microfluidics , which has emerged as an advanced technique in biomedical applications and chemical separations . the pseudo forces namely the centrifugal force and the coriolis force arising as a consequence of the rotating reference frame change the flow pattern significantly from the parabolic profile in a non-rotating channel . the convective heat transfer process is also influenced by the secondary flow introduced by the rotational effect . moreover , if the microchannel wall is hydrophobic , slip flow can occur inside the channel when the conventional no slip boundary condition is no longer valid . In this work , we have numerically investigated the flow and heat transfer inside a straight rotating rectangular microchannel in the slip flow regime . A pressure based finite volume technique in a staggered grid was applied to solve the steady incompressible navier - stokes and energy equations . it has been observed that , depending on the rotational velocity , different slip velocities are induced at the channel walls . the average fluid temperature increases with the increase of rotation as convective heat transfer mechanism is increased due to the secondary flow . however , the slip boundary condition has a negligible effect on the temperature profiles . 
very high heat transfer enhancement can be achieved in single - phase flows by using twisted - tape inserts in circular tubes . the primary convection mechanism is the generation of helical swirl or secondary fluid motion that is induced by the helical curvature of the tape insert . this promotes cross-stream mixing and sharper wall gradients , which are further aided by the increased flow velocity due to the tube partitioning and blockage along with an effectively longer helical flow length . these phenomena are scaled for both laminar and turbulent flow regimes , and an evaluation of the transition is also given to highlight the damping effects of tape - generated swirl . the nature of swirl and its dimensionless scaling , and concomitant development of predictive correlations for heat transfer coefficients and friction factors are discussed . finally , a brief discussion of the quantification of heat transfer enhancement by means of twisted tapes is given so as to extend their application in heat exchanger design . 
the main aim of this study is to examine how the droplet formation in microfluidic t-junctions is influenced by the cross-section and aspect ratio of the microchannels . several studies focusing on droplet formation in microfluidic devices have investigated the effect of geometry on droplet generation in terms of the ratio between the width of the main channel and the width of the side arm of the t-junction . however , the contribution of the aspect ratio and thus that of the crosssection on the mechanism of break up has not been examined thoroughly with most of the existing work performed in the squeezing regime . two different microchannel geometries of varying aspect ratios are employed in an attempt to quantify the effect of the ratio between the width of the main channel and the height of the channel on droplet formation . As both height and width of microchannels affect the area on which shear stress acts deforming the dispersed phase fluid thread up to the limit of detaching a droplet , it is postulated that geometry and specifically cross-section of the main channel contribute on the droplet break-up mechanisms and should not be neglected . the above hypothesis is examined in detail , comparing the volume of generated microdroplets at constant flowrate ratios and superficial velocities of continuous phase in two microchannel systems of two different aspect ratios operating at dripping regime . high - speed imaging has been utilised to visualise and measure droplets formed at different flowrates corresponding to constant superficial velocities . comparing volumes of generated droplets in the two geometries of area ratio near <nUm> , a significant increase in volume is reported for the larger aspect ratio utilised , at all superficial velocities tested . As both superficial velocity of continuous phase and flowrate ratio are fixed , superficial velocity of dispersed phase varies . however this variation is not considered to be large enough to justify the significant increase in the droplet volume . therefore it can be concluded that droplet generation is influenced by the aspect ratio and thus the cross-section of the main channel and its effect should not be depreciated . the paper will present supporting evidence in detail and a comparison of the findings with the existing theories which are mainly focused on the squeezing regime . 
characteristics of gas - liquid two - phase flow under elevated pressures up to <nUm> MPa in a microchannel are investigated to provide the guidance for microreactor designs relevant to industrial application . the results indicate that a strong leakage flow through the channel corners occurs although the gas bubbles block the channel . with a simplified estimation , the leakage flow is shown to increase with an increase in pressure , leading to a bubble formation shifting from transition regime to squeezing regime . during the formation process , the two - phase dynamic interaction at the t-junction entrance would have a significant influence on the flow in the main channel as the moving velocity of generated bubbles varies periodically with the formation cycle . other characteristics such as bubble formation frequency , bubble and slug lengths , bubble velocities , gas hold-up , and the specific surface area are also discussed under different system pressures . 
we demonstrate the control of droplet sizes by an ac voltage applied across microelectrodes patterned around a flow - focusing junction . the electrodes do not come in contact with the fluids to avoid electrochemical effects . we found several regimes of droplet production in electric fields , controlled by the connection of the chip , the conductivity of the dispersed phase and the frequency of the applied field . A simple electrical modelling of the chip reveals that the effective voltage at the tip of the liquid to be dispersed controls the production mechanism . At low voltages ( ≲ <nUm> V ) , droplets are produced in dripping regime ; the droplet size is a function of the ac electric field . the introduction of an effective capillary number that takes into account the maxwell stress can explain the dependance of droplet size with the applied voltage . At higher voltages ( ≳ <nUm> V ) , jets are observed . the stability of droplet production is a function of the fluid conductivity and applied field frequency reported in a set of flow diagrams . 
gaseous flows in microfluidic devices are often characterized by relatively high knudsen numbers . for such flows , the continuum approximation is not valid , and direct - simulation monte carlo ( DSMC ) may be used to find an appropriate solution . for low - velocity flows , where the fluid velocity is much smaller than the mean molecular velocity , large statistical fluctuations in the solution mean that the features of the flow may be obscured by noise in the solution . this paper describes the use of a high - order , nonlinear monotone convection algorithm , flux - corrected transport ( FCT ) , as a filter to extract the solution from the noisy DSMC calculation . we examine the results of filtering a DSMC solution of a noisy low - velocity microchannel flow using both the FCT filter , and a stochastic estimator commonly used to remove noise from noisy sensor measurements . it is shown that FCT filtering removes the high - frequency statistical fluctuations from the noisy DSMC solution , while the stochastic estimator eventually tends toward the wrong solution . although the application in this paper has been limited to microflows , this filter has significant potential for a wide variety of DSMC problems used in physical regimes where statistical noise must be eliminated . because it is a postprocessing operation and does not affect the DSMC calculation as it is running , filtering can be applied to any DSMC solution . this includes calculations with complex geometries , the presence of many interacting species with chemical reactions , varied and complicated boundary conditions , and time - dependent solutions . 
the hollow cathode ( HC ) is currently used in kaufmann type ion thrusters as both a discharge current source and as an ion beam neutralizer . trends toward building small spacecraft necessitate the development of small hollow cathodes for operation both in the traditional manner ( spot mode ) and as stand - alone thrusters ( plume mode ) . while some analysis of the plasma discharge based on limited experimental data exists , comparatively little is currently understood about the plasma discharge that occurs within the HC . many physical processes occur within the discharge and during its initialization . A parallel numerical code capable of modeling the neutral gas dynamics within the hollow cathode has been developed . further analysis of micro hollow cathode fluid behavior is presented here . the direct simulation monte carlo ( DSMC ) method is used because our previous research has shown that the gas dynamic regime of the propellant is often rarefied - the DSMC makes no continuum assumptions . this is particularly important for the microfluidic regime encountered in the case of the micro hollow cathode ; while it has been found that the flow is rarefied for the downstream section of a full - scale hollow cathode , the flow in proposed smaller hollow cathodes is non-continuum throughout . results characterizing the microfluidic gas environments encountered are analyzed and discussed . comparison to thrust measurement experiments is made . the numerical code is demonstrated as a tool for examining the effects of changes in the hollow cathode geometry , and how the alterations relate to the micro gas dynamics . 
In this study , we developed a new method for the direct measurement of differential pressures in a co-flow junction microfluidic device using a capillary laplace gauge ( CLG ) . the CLG - used inside the microchannel device - was designed using a tapered glass - capillary set up in co-flow junction architecture with a three - phase liquid - liquid - gas system with two flowing liquid phases and an entrained gas phase . by taking advantage of the laplace equation , basic geometric relations and an integrated image analysis program , the movement of the entrained gas phase with the flow of the liquid - phases is tracked and monitored , allowing the gauge to function as an ultra-sensitive , integrated , differential pressure sensor measuring fluctuations in the liquid - dispersed phase channel pressure as small as tens of pascals caused by droplet formation . the gauge was used to monitor the drop formation and breakup process in a co-flow junction microfluidic device under different flow conditions across a large range ( <nUm> × 10-3 to <nUm> × 10-1 ) of capillary numbers . In addition to being able to monitor short and long term dispersed phase pressure fluctuation trends for both single drop and large droplet populations , the gauge was also used to clearly identify a transition between the dripping and jetting flow regimes . overall , the combination of a unique , integrated image analysis program with this new type of sensor serves as a powerful tool with great potential for a variety of different research and industrial applications requiring sensitive microchannel pressure measurements . 
we used continuous flow micro-devices as bioreactors for the production of a glycosylated pharmaceutical product ( a monoclonal antibody ) . we cultured CHO cells on the surface of PMMA / PDMS micro-channels that had been textured by micromachining and coated with fibronectin . three different micro-channel geometries ( a wavy channel , a zigzag channel , and a series of donut - shape reservoirs ) were tested in a continuous flow regime in the range of <nUm> to <nUm> mL min-1 . both the geometry of the micro-device and the flow rate had a significant effect on cell adhesion , cell proliferation , and monoclonal antibody production . the most efficient configuration was a series of donut - shaped reservoirs , which yielded mAb concentrations of <nUm> mg L <nUm> at residence times lower than one minute and steady - state productivities above <nUm> mg mL-1 min-1 . these rates are at about <nUm> orders of magnitude higher than those observed in suspended - cell stirred tank fed - batch bioreactors . 
electrical circuit analogies are often used to design microfluidic systems because they simplify device design , providing simple relationships between fluid flow rate , driving forces , and channel dimensions . however , such approximations often significantly overestimate flow rates in situations where start-up energy losses from establishing kinetic head are similar in magnitude to the energy required to overcome viscous shear stresses , as is often the case within complex microfluidic networks . these reduced flows can be more accurately predicted within an electrical analogy framework that accounts for the nonlinear flow resistance generated on the transient regime of start-up flow . In this work , standard flow resistance expressions are modified to account for such effects , and the onset of nonlinear resistance is predicted by a dimensionless parameter , \xi = Re\frac{D}{L} , ξ = Re d L , which is dependent on the reynolds number and the channel length . As a demonstration , variable fluid resistance is shown to dramatically affect the flow performance of common microfluidic units such as t-junctions and serpentine channels , and the change in performance is accurately predicted . experimental and theoretical analysis of t-junctions further shows that variable flow resistance causes the ratio of flows through the junction to converge toward unity with respect to an increasing total flow rate . In addition , serpentine channels are shown to exaggerate these start-up effects , owing to compounded energetic demand associated with changing a flow 's direction . As a result , serpentine channels cause the ratio of flow rates exiting a t-junction to diverge from unity with respect to an increasing flow rate . 
precise control of monodisperse micron - sized liquid droplet emulsions produced in a microfluidic t-junction has far reaching implications in several mechanical , biomedical , and optical applications . this paper is an experimental study in a t-junction microfluidic device , allowing large ranges of interfacial tension between the two immiscible fluids , viscosity ratios , channel geometries , and their impact on droplet formation . classification of the droplet formation regimes , droplet in t-junction ( DTJ ) , droplet in channel ( DC ) , and parallel flow ( PF ) , is further clarified based on experiments in this study and in the literature . our experiments show that the droplet volume decreases and the production frequency increases as the channel aspect ratio ( h / w c ) is increased , consistent with conservation laws . In addition , the transition flow rate ratio ( q d / q c ) for a given capillary number decreases with decreasing aspect ratio for both DTJ-DC and DC-PF transitions , with subscripts d and c referring to the dispersed and continuous phases . larger viscosity ratios ( μ d / μ c ) and interfacial tension values also tend to decrease this transition flow rate ratio for a given capillary number . the viscosity ratio , interfacial tension , and channel geometry have an impact on the DTJ-DC and DC-PF droplet transition regions , and a new parameter , the dimensionless interfacial tension ( Ω ) , is used to further characterize these transition locations . using this parameter , the channel aspect ratio , flow rate ratio , and viscosity ratio , we develop empirical correlations for predicting the DC-PF transition regions for both the squeezing and dripping regimes . these correlations predict the capillary number at which the DC-PF transition will occur with less than <nUm> % error in the dripping regime and less than <nUm> % in the squeezing regime . 

A diagnostic technique capable of characterizing interfaces between transparent , immiscible fluids is developed and demonstrated by investigating the morphology of liquid - gas interfaces in an adiabatic two - phase flow through a microchannel of 500. mm × 500. mm square cross section . water seeded with 0.5. mm-diameter fluorescent polystyrene particles is pumped through the channel , and the desired adiabatic two - phase flow regime is achieved through controlled air injection . the diagnostic technique relies on obtaining particle position data through epifluorescent imaging of the flow at excitation and emission wavelengths of 532. nm and 620. nm , respectively . the particle position data are then used to resolve interface locations to within ± <nUm> . mm in the focal plane . by mapping the interface within individual focal planes at various depths within the channel , it is possible to determine the complete liquid - gas interface geometry across the channel cross section in a dynamic flow environment . utilizing this approach , the liquid - gas phase boundaries of annular flows within a microchannel have been successfully characterized . 
we employ extensive computer simulations to study the flow behavior of spherical , nanoscale colloids in a viscoelastic solvent under poiseuille flow . the systems are confined in a slit - like microfluidic channel , and viscoelasticity is introduced explicitly through the inclusion of polymer chains on the same length scale as the dispersed solute particles . we systematically study the effects of flow strength and polymer concentration , and identify a regime in which the colloids migrate to the centerline of the microchannel , expelling the polymer chains to the sides . this behavior was recently identified in experiments , but a detailed understanding of the underlying physics was lacking . to this end , we provide a detailed analysis of this phenomenon and discuss ways to maximize its effectiveness . the focusing mechanism can be exploited to separate and capture particles at the sub-micrometer scale using simple microfluidic devices , which is a crucial task for many biomedical applications , such as cell counting and genomic mapping . 
this letter reports experimental results of the synchronized formation of two liquid droplets in a microfluidic device . A pair of droplets is formed periodically in a t-junction configuration with a single channel for the continuous phase and two inlets for the dispersed phase . the pair-wise droplet formation process is self - triggering , as the first droplet formed upstream triggers the breakup of the second droplet downstream . the triggered breakup happens across the different formation regimes . the effects of capillary number and flow rate ratio on the size and order of the droplets are investigated . the configuration reported here may serve as a parallel to serial sampling device for droplet - based lab - on - a - chip platforms . 
microfluidics is a multidisciplinary field of science based on the manipulation of fluids in sub-millimeter dimensions where the fundamental fluid physics changes dramatically when compared to macroscale fluid physical phenomena . therefore , the conditions that microfluidic technologies offer are completely different from those of bulk set - ups , and thus they are very interesting for the study of crystallisation because diffusion , mixing and mass and heat transport are all finely controlled , and are easily modulated . this tutorial review is intended to give a broad and up - to - date overview of the distinct microfluidic approaches that have been employed so far for crystallisation studies for the uninitiated in these techniques . main emphasis will be given to microfluidic platforms operating under continuous flow regimes , droplet - based methods , valve - based approaches , well - based methods , and digital microfluidics . this tutorial does not intend to give detailed methodology , but rather provides illustrative examples which capture the attention of the reader and allow them to appreciate the unique features that microfluidic technologies can offer towards the study of different crystallisation processes . indeed , crystallisation studies of different types of crystalline matter including organic , inorganic and metal - organic materials are presented . this journal is 
we experimentally study the production and evolution of partially wetting droplets as a function of the dynamic advancing contact angle and the viscosity of the external phase in microchannels . the natural spreading properties of immersed droplets are measured using high - speed goniometry and their forced spreading behaviors are probed in confined microgeometries . low- and high - viscosity microfluidic segmented flows are generated by focusing water in a continuous phase of silicone oil using square microchannels . the shape and stability of the lubricating film between droplets and channel walls permit the classification of typical flow regimes , including wetting , thin film , thick film , and constant film thickness . hysteretic partially wetting systems are shown to exhibit two modes of droplets formation , namely dripping and rivulet . small - scale multiphase flows are investigated as a function of capillary number , droplet size , concentration , and velocity . we also discuss the occurrence of dynamic wetting transitions and stick - and - slip motion of microfluidic droplets . this study shows the possibility to control droplet dynamic wetting behavior with flow rates of injection in microfluidic platforms . 
the effect of confinement on the droplet formation in T junctions was studied for three configurations of fluid injection . the sizes of the main droplets and the satellite droplets were measured in the squeezing and dripping regimes . the evolution of droplet sizes with capillary number in the continuous phase is similar to that in flow - focusing junctions , i.e. , the size of the main droplets decreases with an increase of this capillary number , while the size of the satellite droplets increases with an increase of this capillary number . while in the range of flow rates investigated the injection configuration does not exhibit a significant effect on the main droplet sizes , it does have an effect on the size of the satellite droplets . the latter ones are smaller when the neck rupture of the droplet occurs on an angle of the microsystem . 
emulsion droplets or multi-emulsion droplet formation was important for functional materials synthesizing by microfluidic . to obtain tunable monodisperse droplets with millimeter scale , the flow regime in co-flowing channels was divided by numerical simulation . A typical co-flowing model was created using finite volume method , and the VOF ( volume of fluid ) muti - phase model was selected . then , droplets were produced by changing the velocity ratio under the dripping regime . compared to the experimental value of droplet diameter , theoretical and numerical absolute error was below <nUm> % and <nUm> % , separately . greet agreement of diameter changing tendency was found in simulation and experiment . 
In this work we studied the flow of immiscible fluids in rectangular microfluidic channels with a T junction . depending on the flow rate of the aqueous and oil phase , various flow such as parallel flows or monodisperse droplets are obtained in the outlet channel . we focused on the transition from droplet regime to parallel flows . due to the confinement and the flow , this transition can not be described by capillary arguments . the mechanism of droplet formation mechanism in the channel is elucidating using confocal microscopy and high speed imaging . the formation can be depicted in a blocking - pinching mechanism . we are working on a convective instability analysis to predict the transition between parallel flow and droplet formation . 
we report first experimental observations of dynamics of compound vesicles in linear flow realized in a microfluidic four - roll mill . we show that while a compound vesicle undergoes the same main tank - treading , trembling ( TR ) , and tumbling regimes , its dynamics are far richer and more complex than that of unilamellar vesicles . A new swinging motion of the inner vesicle is found in TR in accord with simulations . the inner and outer vesicles can exist simultaneously in different dynamical regimes and can undergo either synchronized or unsynchronized motions depending on the filling factor . A compound vesicle can be used as a physical model to study white blood cell dynamics in flow similar to a unilamellar vesicle used successfully to model anucleate cells . 
we report experimental results on chaotic mass transport induced by alternating topological changes of magnetic particle chains actuated by a rotating magnetic field . results on the induced fluid flows , through particle tracing experiments and mixing experiments , are obtained for ( 1 ) the regime of rigid chain rotation and ( 2 ) the regime wherein chains periodically fragment and reform . In the case of rigid rotating chains , the overall tracer particle trajectories are steady , slightly modulated circles around the center of the microparticle chains . In the regime of periodic chain breaking and reformation , the tracer particle trajectories become chaotic . the level of mixing is measured by using a mixing index ( m ) in a water - dye system , i.e. , in a perfectly mixed system m = <nUm> , while in an unmixed system m = <nUm> . when particle chains periodically break and reform , we observe that the mixing index m decreases from <nUm> to <nUm> within <nUm> rotational cycles . for rigid rotating chains , m reaches a minimum of only <nUm> . we also report the effect of the different actuation regimes on a biological binding reaction in the solution and indeed found that the reaction product ( at equal actuation time ) is significantly enhanced ( <nUm> times ) by the dynamic chain regime as compared to the rigid chain regime . we conclude that the alternating topological change of microparticle chains - with repetitive chain breakup and chain reformation-is an effective mechanism to achieve chaotic mixing and thereby promote and homogenize reactions in lab-ona-chip systems . 
numerical simulations have been performed on the pressure - driven rarefied flow through channels with a sudden contraction - expansion of <nUm> : <nUm> : <nUm> using isothermal two and three - dimensional lattice boltzmann method ( LBM ) . In the LBM , a bosanquet - type effective viscosity and a modified second - order slip boundary condition are used to account for the rarefaction effect on gas viscosity to cover the slip and transition flow regimes , that is , a wider range of knudsen number . firstly , the in-house LBM code is verified by comparing the computed pressure distribution and flow pattern with experimental ones measured by others . the verified code is then used to study the effects of the outlet knudsen number kno , driving pressure ratio pi / Po , and reynolds number Re , respectively , varied in the ranges of <nUm> - <nUm> , <nUm> - <nUm> , and <nUm> - <nUm> , on the pressure distributions and flow patterns as well as to document the differences between continuum and rarefied flows . results are discussed in terms of the distributions of local pressure , knudsen number , centerline velocity , and mach number . the variations of flow patterns and vortex length with kno and Re are also documented . moreover , a critical knudsen number is identified to be knoc = <nUm> below and above which the behaviors of nonlinear pressure profile and velocity distribution and the variations of vortex length with Re upstream and downstream of constriction are different from those of continuum flows . 
the gauss - laguerre quadrature method is used on the cartesian semiaxes in the momentum space to construct a family of lattice boltzmann models . when all quadrature orders qx , qy , qz equal N+1 , the laguerre lattice boltzmann model LLB(Qx,Qy,Qz) exactly recovers all moments up to order N of the maxwell - boltzmann equilibrium distribution function f(eq) , calculated over any cartesian octant of the three - dimensional momentum space . results of couette flow simulations at kn = <nUm> , <nUm> , <nUm> and in the ballistic regime are reported . specific microfluidic effects ( velocity slip , temperature jump , longitudinal heat flux ) are well captured up to kn = <nUm> , as demonstrated by comparison to direct simulation monte carlo results . excellent agreement with analytic results is obtained in the ballistic regime . 
we studied the water - in - oil ( W / O ) emulsion droplet formation in a simple coaxial microfluidic device with varying the flow rate of continuous phase and investigated the effect of the flow rate on the size and coefficient of variance of the emulsion droplets . the emulsion droplets prepared in the dripping regime at a low flow rate of the continuous phase exhibited a uniform size distribution . the increase in the flow rate of the continuous phase resulted in a transition from the dripping regime to the jetting regime . the emulsion droplets produced in the jetting regime exhibited multimodal size distributions , which is mainly attributed to the formation of satellite droplets . based on the calculated capillary number ( Ca ) and the weber number ( we ) , we suggest that the flow rate of the continuous phase and the viscosity of the discontinuous phase are the key factors for determining the regime of droplet formation . we believe that these results can serve as a guideline for the determination of flow rates for the production of uniform emulsion droplets in coaxial fluidic devices . 
In this paper , we present a fluorescence activated sorter realized in a continuous flow microfluidic chip . sorting is achieved by deflecting a focused particle stream with short acoustic bursts ( <nUm> ms ) , in a fluorescence activated configuration . the system utilizes two - dimensional acoustic pre-focusing , using a single actuation frequency , to position all particles in the same fluid velocity regime at flow rates up to <nUm> mL min-1 . particles were sorted based on their fluorescence intensities at throughputs up to <nUm> particles s-1 . the highest purity reached was <nUm> % when sorting at an average rate of <nUm> particles s-1 . the average recovery of a sort was <nUm> ± <nUm> % . the presented system enables fluorescence activated cell sorting in a continuous flow microfluidic format that allows aseptic integration of downstream microfluidic functionalities , opening for medical and clinical applications . 
the present work comprehensively addresses the hydrodynamic characteristics through microchannels with lotus leaf replica ( exhibiting low adhesion and superhydrophobic properties ) walls . the lotus leaf replica is fabricated following an efficient , two - step , soft - molding process and is then integrated with rectangular microchannels . the inherent biomimetic , superhydrophobic surface - liquid interfacial hydrodynamics , and the consequential bulk flow characteristics , are critically analyzed by the micro-particle image velocimetry technique . it is observed that the lotus leaf replica mediated microscale hydrodynamics comprise of two distinct flow regimes even within the low reynolds number paradigm , unlike the commonly perceived solely apparent slip - stick dominated flows over superhydrophobic surfaces . while the first flow regime is characterized by an apparent slip - stick flow culminating in an enhanced bulk throughput rate , the second flow regime exhibits a complete breakdown of the aforementioned laminar and uni-axial flow model , leading to a predominantly no - slip flow . interestingly , the critical flow condition dictating the transition between the two hydrodynamic regimes is intrinsically dependent on the micro-confinement effect . In this regard , an energetically consistent theoretical model is also proposed to predict the alterations in the critical flow condition with varying microchannel configurations , by addressing the underlying biomimetic surface - liquid interfacial conditions . hence , the present research endeavour provides a new design - guiding paradigm for developing multi-functional microfluidic devices involving biomimetic , superhydrophobic surfaces , by judicious exploitation of the tunable hydrodynamic characteristics in the two regimes . this journal is 
In this paper , jetting behavior of two immiscible liquids , water as the outer liquid and silicone oil as the inner liquid in typical flow focusing microchannels were numerically studied using VOF method . At low capillary number , uniform microdroplets were obtained by the absolute instability . with the increasing of fluid flow ratio , the jet is thinner and tends to break up further away the cross junction . the results showed that the flow rate ratio is the main factor that influences the microdroplet sizes , while the frequency of microdroplets formation can be controlled mainly by the surface tension when it is in the jetting regime . 
A fully coupled electrothermal flow model is developed to simulate the electrothermal flow inside a droplet under AC electro-wetting on dielectric ( EWOD ) with a needle-planar-electrode configuration . the variations of electrothermal flow velocity and droplet temperature with frequency are compared with a classical electrothermal model and a previous experimental study . the investigated frequency range is extended to include dielectrophoretic ( DEP ) force dominant regime , and differences of characteristics of velocity and temperature fields in the coulomb and DEP force dominant regimes are discussed and compared . effects of solution concentration and needle electrode position and size are also examined . the results show that peak frequency to achieve the maximum electrothermal flow , underestimated by the classical model is correctly predicted by the present fully coupled model . after peak frequency , the velocity decreases till the valley frequency where the minimum electrothermal flow can be achieved , and then increases again , and finally keeps almost unchanged . after the valley frequency , the rotation of internal flow changes from counterclockwise to clockwise . when frequency is smaller , the smaller the solution concentration , the larger the electrothermal flow , while when frequency is larger , the result is opposite . the peak frequency and its corresponding electrothermal flow velocity increase with the increase of solution concentration . the needle electrode size has no influence on peak frequency , but the maximum electrothermal flow velocity at the peak frequency increases with decreasing electrode size . the smaller is the distance of needle electrode from the substrate , the larger are the peak frequency and the corresponding maximum electrothermal flow velocity . the numerical model developed and the results obtained in this study are useful for the design of droplet based electrothermal flow mixer in microfluidics . 
the role of dispersants on hydrocarbon phase behavior in seawater is an important problem that influences marine environment ecology . offshore petroleum and natural gas catastrophes , such as the deepwater horizon spill of <nUm> , motive the need to understand how to minimize the introduction of potentially invasive compounds while maximizing their efficacy during emergency remediation . the microfluidic stabilities of mineral oilseawater multiphase flows in the presence of model dispersants were studied for we < <nUm> . introducing dispersants at varying dimensionless volumetric injection rates , ranging from <nUm> to <nUm> , transitions from stable slug flow to the bubbly regime . dimensionless mass ratios of three model dispersants to the mineral oil necessary to establish emulsions were estimated from <nUm> × 10-3 to <nUm> × 10-3 . residence time distributions of seawater single - phase and mineral oilseawater multiphase flows , laden with dispersants , were also investigated . increasing the dimensionless dispersant injection rate from <nUm> to <nUm> was observed to increase convective dispersion , which was confirmed by estimations of the vessel dispersion number and the bodenstein number . the observations undergird that microfluidics are useful laboratory techniques to identify the transition to bubbly flow where bacteria consumption rates could potentially be enhanced , while minimizing the dispersant mass introduced into calm - sea marine environments . 
In a knudsen pump , gas flows from the cold side to the hot side when a temperature gradient is established . for the pump to operate , the gas channels must be small such that the flow regime is transitional or free molecular . In this paper , a model for a thermoelectric based knudsen pump is presented . the thermoelectric element , which is nanoporous , serves as a generator for the temperature gradient and as a medium for gas flow . equations for the maximum mass flow rate and maximum pressure were obtained , which can be used to optimize a knudsen pump . using the model , the authors found that the higher the thermoelectric figure of merit z , the higher the generated pressure and mass flow rate . the maximum pressure is independent of the thermoelectric dimensions , which makes it readily integrated into many applications such as lab - on - a chip , microelectromechanical systems , and microfluidic devices . 
we analyze the effect of confinement on the transient dynamics of liquid drops , suspended in another immiscible liquid medium , under the influence of an externally applied uniform dc electric field . for our analysis , we adhere to an analytical framework conforming to a newtonian-leaky-dielectric liquid model in the stokes flow regime , under the small deformation approximation . we characterize the transient relaxation of the drop shape towards its asymptotic configuration , attributed by the combined confluence of the charge - relaxation time scale and the intrinsic shape - relaxation time scale . while the former appears due to the charge accumulation process on the drop surface over a finite interval of time , the genesis of the latter is found to be intrinsic to the hydrodynamic situation under consideration . In an unbounded condition , the intrinsic shape - relaxation time scale is strongly governed by the viscosity ratio , defined as the ratio of dynamic viscosities of the droplet and the background liquid . however , when the wall effects are brought into consideration , the combined influence of the relative extent of the confinement and the intrinsic viscosity effects , acting in tandem , alter this time scale in a rather complicated and nontrivial manner . we reveal that the presence of confinement may dramatically increase the effective viscosity ratio that could have otherwise been required in an unconfined domain to realize identical time - relaxation characteristics . we also bring out the alterations in the streamline patterns because of the combinations of transient and confinement effects . thus , our results reveal that the extent of fluidic confinement may provide an elegant alternative towards manipulating the transient dynamics of liquid drops in the presence of an externally applied electric field , bearing far - ranging consequences towards the design and functionalities of several modern - day microfluidic applications . 
we have designed and built a polymer - based microfluidic system for the realtime monitoring of enzyme activity by combining liquid - liquid two - phase flow with fluorescence cross-correlation spectroscopy ( FCCS ) . aqueous sample droplets were generated in a perfluorocarbon ( FC <nUm> ) carrier fluid with a nonionic fluoroussoluble surfactant ( perfluorooctanol , <nUm> % v / v ) in a polymer microchip operating in the capillary two - phase flow regime . the optical system was demonstrated to monitor controlled generation of highly regular droplets loaded with fluorescent beads at delivery rates ranging from <nUm> - <nUm> droplets s-1 . stable two - phase flow was promoted by rendering the walls of the microfluidic channel hydrophobic . 
bead based assays require the essential steps of particle mixing , segregation , and extraction . In droplet microfluidics , particle concentration techniques typically require either electrical or magnetic fields together with charged or magnetic particles . here we present a passive , on - chip particle mixing , segregation , and extraction technique based on the interaction between naturally occurring hydrodynamic recirculating flows and particle sedimentation within the plug . the interaction can be quantified using the shields number ( θ ) , a dimensionless ratio of a particle 's drag force to its gravitational force , which scales with plug velocity . depending on θ , three distinct flow regimes can be defined , and the key steps of particle segregation and resuspension can be performed simply by changing flow velocity . we demonstrate highly efficient concentration ( ∼ <nUm> % ) of <nUm> mm glass beads in <nUm> and <nUm> mm diameter plugs traveling at velocities up to <nUm> mm / s . segregated particles are then extracted using a transverse drop splitter . this technique expands the capabilities of plug - based microfluidics to perform particle filtration without on - chip components and thereby could be applied to bead - based screening assays . 
In modern microprocessors , thermal management has become one of the main hurdles in continued performance enhancement . cooling schemes utilizing single phase microfluidics have been investigated extensively for enhanced heat dissipation from microprocessors . however , two - phase fluidic cooling devices are becoming a promising approach , and are less understood . this study aims to examine two - phase flow and heat transfer within a pin - fin enhanced micro-gap . the pinfin array covered an area of <nUm> cm × <nUm> cm and had a pin diameter , height and pitch of <nUm> mm , <nUm> mm and <nUm> mm , respectively , ( aspect ratio of <nUm> ) . heating from two upstream heaters was considered . the working fluid used was r245fa . the average heat transfer coefficient was evaluated for a range of heat fluxes and flow rates . flow regime visualization was performed using high - speed imaging . results indicate a sharp transition to convective flow boiling mechanism . unique , conically - shaped two - phase wakes are recorded , demonstrating 2D spreading capability of the device . surface roughness features are also discussed . 
we report experimental results on chaotic mass transport induced by alternating topological changes of magnetic particle chains actuated by a rotating magnetic field . we show the induced fluid flows and the level of fluid mixing for ( 1 ) the regime of rigid chain rotation and ( 2 ) the regime in which the chains periodically fragment and reform . the effects of the different actuation regimes on a biological binding reaction in the solution are also reported . we conclude that the alternating topological change of microparticle chains is an effective mechanism to achieve chaotic mixing and thereby promote and homogenize reactions in lab - on - a - chip systems . 
many current chemical , medical and pharmaceutical applications require precise measurement of fluidic flow in microfluidic regime where traditional flow metrology standards are obsolete or unavailable . it is often mandatory on the other hand for the flow metrology agency to provide certifications of any possible products in services . In this paper we present a systematic study from liquid from below <nUm> mL / sec in the flow channels smaller than <nUm> mm in diameter . the transportation , pressure , composition , temperature and other ambient effects are measured for the metrological effects . MEMS flow sensing technology with thermal time - of - flight operation mode and calorimetric mode is used as the benchmark to test various flow metrology standard methodology ( e.g. gravimetrical , optical , and vibrational ) such that a fast calibration metrology standard could be established to certify the available products on markets . 
micropost arrays serve as a plaform for the next generation of diagnostic devices . these arrays are found in microfluidic devices for peripheral blood - based diagnostics and metastatic cancer management . the function and performance of these devices is determined by the underlying micro-scale fluid mechanics . typically , these devices operate in the creeping regime ( Re < < <nUm> ) where the viscous forces of the fluids dominate . recent advances in manufacturing allow for higher reynolds number flows ( Re > > <nUm> ) where the inertial forces dominate . In this work , we use computational simulations to show there is a transitional region ( <nUm> < Re < <nUm> ) in between the laminar and creeping regimes for two different micropost array geometries . numerical analysis is employed to investigate jet formation both within the array and at the array exit . the peak - to - peak amplitude of the streamwise normalized velocity profile is used to quantify jet formation within the array ; the streamwise velocity profile at the end of the array exit is used to determine jet length at the exit of the array . above the transitional region ( Re > <nUm> ) significant jets form downstream of the posts , amplitude scales exponentially and jet length scales with Re according to power law . 
artificial cilia systems are used for microfluidic manipulation . by analogy to the biological cilia , such systems seek to mix , separate , or propel fluids , particularly in the low - reynolds number regime , without damaging sensitive samples . an important category of artificial cilia systems is magnetically - actuated artificial cilia , since the driving magnetic field does not interact with many samples of interest . simulation results are presented to show that linear modeling fails to adequately predict the optimal location due to strong nonlinear effects ; using the linear result to select magnet placement results in amplitudes <nUm> % lower than the amplitude with the optimal placement found using the nonlinear model . this represents a substantial loss in efficacy . since large amplitudes are desirable to enhance flow manipulation , the results illustrate the importance of nonlinear dynamics models in the design of magnet - cilia devices . 
this paper presents a novel method to control electro osmotic flow ( EOF ) with AC electrical fields . it is shown that with a single potential the zeta potential at a solid liquid interface and the channel potential that drives the EOF can be controlled in a synchronized matter to create a net flow with zero average potential . the frequency regime in which the EOF can be controlled is bound by the capacitive charging of the electrical double layer ( EDL ) as an upper limit and the formation of bubbles at the open channel electrodes by electrolysis as a lower limit . 
we studied the dissolution dynamics of CO2 gas bubbles in a microfluidic channel , both experimentally and theoretically . In the experiments , spherical CO2 bubbles in a flow of a solution of sodium dodecyl sulfate ( SDS ) first shrink rapidly before attaining an equilibrium size . In the rapid dissolution regime , the time to obtain a new equilibrium is <nUm> ms regardless of SDS concentration , and the equilibrium radius achieved varies with the SDS concentration . to explain the lack of complete dissolution , we interpret the results by considering the effects of other gases ( O , N ) that are already dissolved in the aqueous phase , and we develop a multicomponent dissolution model that includes the effect of surface tension and the liquid pressure drop along the channel . solutions of the model for a stationary gas bubble show good agreement with the experimental results , which lead to our conclusion that the equilibrium regime is obtained by gas exchange between the bubbles and liquid phase . also , our observations from experiments and model calculations suggest that SDS molecules on the gas - liquid interface form a diffusion barrier , which controls the dissolution behaviour and the eventual equilibrium radius of the bubble . this journal is 
mixing of fluids at the microscale poses a variety of challenges , many of which arise from the fact that diffusion is the only available mechanism to achieve mixing in the laminar flow regime . In this work , we propose a novel hybrid micromixer design incorporating ( i ) an asymmetric serpentine geometry in which the channel width abruptly changes across successive bends ( effective at Re > <nUm> ) , and ( ii ) slanted barriers on the bottom channel surface ( effective at Re < <nUm> ) . the resulting hybrid design is capable of efficient mixing over a greatly expanded Re range than currently achievable . 
controlled manipulation of particles from very large volumes of fluid at high throughput is critical for many biomedical , environmental and industrial applications . one promising approach is to use microfluidic technologies that rely on fluid inertia or elasticity to drive lateral migration of particles to stable equilibrium positions in a microchannel . here , we report on a hydrodynamic approach that enables deterministic focusing of beads , mammalian cells and anisotropic hydrogel particles in a microchannel at extremely high flow rates . we show that on addition of micromolar concentrations of hyaluronic acid , the resulting fluid viscoelasticity can be used to control the focal position of particles at reynolds numbers up to Re ≈ <nUm> with corresponding flow rates and particle velocities up to <nUm> ml min-1 and <nUm> ms-1 . this study explores a previously unattained regime of inertio-elastic fluid flow and demonstrates bioparticle focusing at flow rates that are the highest yet achieved . 
the ability to separate liquid and gas phases in the absence of a gravitational acceleration has proven a challenge to engineers since the inception of space exploration . due to our singular experience with terrestrial systems , artificial body forces are often imparted in multiphase fluid systems aboard spacecraft to reproduce the buoyancy effect . this approach tends to be inefficient , adding complexity , resources , and failure modes . ever present in multiphase phenomena , the forces of surface tension can be exploited to aid passive phase separations where performance characteristics are determined solely by geometric design and system wettability . said systems may be readily designed as demonstrated herein where a regulated bubbly flow is drawn through an open triangular sectioned duct . the bubbles passively migrate toward the free surface where they coalesce and leave the flow . the tests clearly show container aspect ratios required for passive phase separations for various liquid and gas flow rates . preliminary data are presented as regime maps demarking complete phase separation . long duration microgravity experiments are performed aboard the international space station . supplementary experiments are conducted using a drop tower . 
microfluidic fuel cells operate in the laminar flow regime , thus their fuel utilization is low . A trade - off exists between fuel utilization and output power density . to achieve high output power density and fuel utilization simultaneously , several parameters should be optimized . we have employed a multi-objective optimization method to optimize a simple y-shaped microfluidic fuel cell with rectangular cross section channel . an electrochemical model for microfluidic fuel cell in MATLAB environment is developed and validated . by coupling this model with multi-objective optimization algorithm the multi-objective optimization problem is defined . genetic algorithm is used to solve this multi-objective optimization problem . the pareto set , represents a quantitative description of the trade - off between power density and fuel utilization . the results show that to make the most of the power density - fuel utilization trade - off behavior , fuel cell should be operated at current density no more than <nUm> mW / cm2 . almost for all solutions in pareto set , the values of channel width and fuel concentration are <nUm> mm and <nUm> mol / m <nUm> , respectively . 
double emulsion formation in flow - focusing microchannel is numerically analyzed by using the volume - of - fluid method to track the interface motion with a focus on the drop formation regimes . two distinct regimes , dripping and jetting , are presented , and the effects of the flow rates on double emulsion formation are analyzed . the results indicate that the outer fluid flow rate triggers the transition of drop formation regime and has influence on the drop size , however , increasing the flow rate of the middle fluid only introduce slight increase of outer drop size and its effect on the drop formation regime is not significant . 
A model system was developed for enabling a multiscale understanding of centrifugal - contactor liquid - liquid extraction . the system consisted of Nd(III)+xylenol orange in the aqueous phase buffered to pH = <nUm> by KHP , and dodecane+thenoyltrifluroroacetone (HTTA)+tributyphosphate ( TBP ) in the organic phase . diffusion constants were measured for neodymium in both the organic and aqueous phases , and the Nd (III) partition coefficients were measured at various HTTA and TBP concentrations . A microfluidic channel was used as a high - shear model environment to observe mass transfer on a droplet scale with xylenol orange as the aqueous - phase metal indicator ; mass - transfer rates were measured quantitatively in both diffusion and reaction limited regimes on the droplet scale . the microfluidic results were comparable to observations made for the same system in a laboratory scale liquid - liquid centrifugal contactor , indicating that single drop microfluidic experiments can provide information on mass transfer in complicated flows and geometries . 

rotating helical bodies of arbitrary cross-sectional profile and infinite length are explored as they swim through or transport a viscous fluid . the stokes equations are studied in a helical coordinate system , and closed form analytical expressions for the force - free swimming speed and torque are derived in the asymptotic regime of nearly cylindrical bodies . high - order accurate expressions for the velocity field and swimming speed are derived for helical bodies of finite pitch angle through a double series expansion . the analytical predictions match well with the results of full numerical simulations , and accurately predict the optimal pitch angle for a given cross-sectional profile . this work may improve the modeling and design of helical structures used in microfluidic manipulation , synthetic microswimmer engineering , and the transport and mixing of viscous fluids 
the present work proposes towards flow pattern prediction in a liquid- liquid microchannel flow through a circular channel . mass transfer in a microchannel mainly depends on the flow regime inside the channel . the liquid - liquid two phase flow regime in a microchannel depends on the flow velocity and the junction characteristics . hence , the prediction of patterns has a superior role for the characterisation of mass transfer rates . this paper experimentally investigates the flow pattern in an <nUm> micro meter diameter microchannel with T junction . the slug length variation corresponding to varying inlet flow rate for the aqueous ( water ) - organic ( kerosene ) liquids is visualised and measured . A model for the prediction of liquid- liquid flow patterns in a circular t-shaped microchannel is designed using probabilistic neural network ( PNN ) . the designed PNN algorithm is explicitly validated by comparing the predicted patterns with the experimentally observed data . 
prediction and manipulation of the evaporation of small droplets is a fundamental problem with importance in a variety of microfluidic , microfabrication , and biomedical applications . A vapor - diffusion - based model has been widely employed to predict the interfacial evaporation rate ; however , its scope of applicability is limited due to incorporation of a number of simplifying assumptions of the physical behavior . two key transport mechanisms besides vapor diffusion - evaporative cooling and natural convection in the surrounding gas - are investigated here as a function of the substrate wettability using an augmented droplet evaporation model . three regimes are distinguished by the instantaneous contact angle ( CA ) . In regime I ( CA ≤ <nUm> ° ) , the flat droplet shape results in a small thermal resistance between the liquid - vapor interface and substrate , which mitigates the effect of evaporative cooling ; upward gas - phase natural convection enhances evaporation . In regime II ( <nUm> ≤ CA ≤ <nUm> ° ) , evaporative cooling at the interface suppresses evaporation with increasing contact angle and counterbalances the gas - phase convection enhancement . because effects of the evaporative cooling and gas - phase convection mechanisms largely neutralize each other , the vapor - diffusion - based model can predict the overall evaporation rates in this regime . In regime III ( CA ≥ <nUm> ° ) , evaporative cooling suppresses the evaporation rate significantly and reverses entirely the direction of natural convection induced by vapor concentration gradients in the gas phase . delineation of these counteracting mechanisms reconciles previous debate ( founded on single - surface experiments or models that consider only a subset of the governing transport mechanisms ) regarding the applicability of the classic vapor - diffusion model . the vapor diffusion - based model can not predict the local evaporation flux along the interface for high contact angle ( CA ≥ <nUm> ° ) when evaporative cooling is strong and the temperature gradient along the interface determines the peak local evaporation flux . 
droplet - based microfluidics became a powerful tool for quantitative high - throughput analysis of molecular and biological interactions . gradient dosing can be applied for the generation of large sample collections with systematic variation in the concentration of the ingredients and effectors . droplets can be incubated in capillary systems preserving their order . In this serial regime the concentration pattern in each droplet can be recalculated from its number , it 's creation time and the gradient dosing program , used for the generation of the droplet collection . up to now , saw-fish-tooth like concentration gradients are widely used for this purpose . In our work we investigate the potential of periodic sinusoidal gradients for this type of screening applications . due to their periodicity and continuity it is expected , that these types of gradients improve reliability in the gradient generation process due to the lack of discontinuities in the flow rates . on the other hand the key features of these gradients in terms of continuity and periodicity allow improvements in data analysis and error detection to gain more accurate analytical results . this initial hypothesis is proved in droplet - based experiments for the measurement of the minimum inhibitory concentration of the antibiotic ciprofloxacin to bacterial strain E. coli RV308 . 
we present a novel microfluidic device that allows for the rapid production of monodisperse bulk emulsions in large volumes , directly inside a beaker filled with the carrier fluid . to do so , we massively parallelize the droplet production nozzles described in dangla et. al. [1] . contrary to classical flow focusing [2,3] or t-junction [4] techniques , this approach does n't require a flow of the carrier phase and the device is operated by injecting the dispersed phase only . we demonstrate the production of droplets <nUm> mm in diameter at flow rates in the mL / min regime and at frequencies above <nUm> kHz . 
this work presents a microfluidic chip that enables the comparative culturing of single cells , immobilized along both walls of a channel , and exposed to different media under a laminar - flow regime . the key feature is that single cells can be reliably trapped using hydrodynamic forces and selectively released on - demand by using negative dielectrophoretic forces . this combined system allows for controlled population of trapping sites before a certain experiment and for release of individual cells showing interesting behavior during or after specific compound exposure . 




surface acoustic waves ( SAWs ) are an effective means to pump fluids through microchannel arrays within fully portable systems . the SAW - driven acoustic counterflow pumping process relies on a cascade phenomenon consisting of SAW transmission through the microchannel , SAW - driven fluid atomization , and subsequent coalescence . here , we investigate miniaturization of device design , and study both SAW transmission through microchannels and the onset of SAW - driven atomization up to the ultra-high-frequency regime . within the frequency range from <nUm> MHz to <nUm> MHz , we show that the acoustic power required to initiate SAW atomization remains constant , while transmission through microchannels is most effective when the channel widths w ≥ <nUm> λ , where λ is the SAW wavelength . by exploiting the enhanced SAW transmission through narrower channels at ultra-high frequencies , we discuss the relevant frequency - dependent length scales and demonstrate the scaling down of internal flow patterns and discuss their impact on device miniaturization strategies . 






















the results of an experimental investigation of the energy separation performance of a micro-scale ranque - hilsch vortex tube are presented in this paper . the micro-scale vortex tube is <nUm> mm in diameter and constructed using a layered technique from multiple pieces of plexiglas and aluminum . four inlet slots , symmetrically located around the tube , form the vortex . the hydraulic diameter of each inlet slot and the orifice diameter for the cold exit are <nUm> and <nUm> microns respectively . the working fluid is low pressure , non-dehumidified compressed air at room temperature . the rate of the hot gas flow is varied by means of a control valve to achieve different values of cold mass fraction . the mass flow rates , temperatures and pressures of the supply and outlet flows are measured and the performance of the device presented . the supply channel reynolds number is varied over a considerable range which extends into the laminar regime in order to determine the operating conditions for cooling . an increase in dimensionless temperature is found in both the cold and hot outlets as supply nozzle reynolds number increases from zero . maximum values occur at a reynolds number of approximately <nUm> and the cold flow dimensionless temperature becomes negative at about <nUm> . although the optimum cold mass ratio is higher than the conventional tubes , the effect on performance of tube length and cold exit diameter is similar to the conventional devices . 
organic - aqueous ( phenol ) liquid extraction is one of the commonly used DNA purification methods . effective mass transfer of biological material between the discrete fluid phases is key to achieving efficient extraction when designing microfluidic devices based on this technique . In the microscale regime , mass transfer is often diffusion limited . however , mass transfer can be enhanced through the formation of discrete droplets within a microchannel , which leads to a recirculation flow pattern within the droplet . this recirculation increases the mass transfer rate of material to the organic - aqueous interface . In this study , an experimental and computational examination of sample extraction between the organic and aqueous phases through droplet formation is presented . the experiment is conducted within a converging dual inlet microfluidic channel fabricated in PDMS . by controlling the capillary number of the flow , different flow patterns are created in the channel . the flow patterns are examined using a computational fluid dynamics ( CFD ) simulation . the CFD model successfully simulates the flow behavior under a variety of flow conditions and provides a closer examination of the internal recirculation pattern within the droplet . the experimental sample extraction utilizes a fluorescent dye localization technique and shows that the droplet flow offers a significant improvement in the speed of sample extraction over diffusional mixing . A preliminary test demonstrates the feasibility of using the droplet formation for fast extraction with biological samples . 
we investigate the dynamics of a vesicle in a shear flow on the basis of the newly proposed advected field ( AF ) method [ T. biben and C. misbah , eur. phys. J . e <nUm> , <nUm> ( 2003 ) ] . we also solve the same problem with the boundary integral formulation for the sake of comparison . we find that the AF results presented previously overestimated the tumbling threshold due to the finite size of the membrane , inherent to the AF model . A comparison between the two methods shows that only in the sharp interface limit ( extrapolating the results to a vanishing width ) the AF method leads to accurate quantitative results . we extensively investigate the tank - treading to tumbling transition , and compare our numerical results to the theory of keller and skalak which assumes a fixed ellipsoidal shape for the vesicle . we show that this theory describes correctly the two regimes , at least in two dimensions , even for the quite elongated non-convex shapes corresponding to red blood cells ( and therefore far from ellipsoidal ) , this theory is , however , not fully quantitative . finally we investigate the effect of a confinement on the tank - treading to tumbling transition , and show that the tumbling regime becomes unfavorable in a capillary vessel , which should have strong effects on blood rheology in confined geometries . 

















this paper is focused on the study of microfluidic devices implemented in silicon . microactuators with no moving parts , microfluidic amplifiers , were integrated with microchannels . the operation of the obtained devices was analyzed in terms of gas flow control and division . considering flow control , the devices presented proportional and symmetrical behavior with high proportional flow gains ( output flow / control flow ) , similar to fluidic amplifiers with supply hydraulic diameters higher than hundreds of microns . for operation with flow division , a transition to a linear behavior between the supply flow and supply pressure is observed and the devices presented symmetrical output characteristics . also , in this case , at moderate supply pressures , the results of numerical simulation indicate the possibility of internal choked flow , at the output of the supply nozzle , and supersonic regime in the interaction region . 
















micro-total analysis systems ( mTAS ) have attracted wide attention and are identified as a promising solution for sample transport , filtration , chemical reactions , separation and detection . despite their popularity , the selection of an appropriate mechanism for droplet transport and coalescence has always been a challenge . this paper investigates the use of marangoni flow as a mechanism for levitating and transporting droplets on immiscible liquid films at higher speeds than is possible currently . for the first time , we show that it is possible to realize the natural coalescence of droplets through marangoni effect without any external stimulation , and deliver the coalesced droplet to a certain destination through the use of surface tension gradients . the effects of shape and size on collision outcome are studied . regions of coalescence and stretching separation of colliding droplets are delineated based on weber number and impact number . In addition , the effect of viscosity on post collision regimes is studied . the findings in this fundamental study can be beneficial to many applications such as welding , drug delivery and microfluidics devices in controlling small droplets and targeting them to various locations . 































thermal fluctuations , geometric exclusion , and external driving all govern the mechanical response of dense particulate suspensions . here , we measure the stress - strain response of quasi-two - dimensional flow - stabilized microsphere heaps in a regime in which all three effects are present using a microfluidic device . we observe that the elastic modulus and the mean interparticle separation of the heaps are tunable via the confining stress provided by the fluid flow . furthermore , the measured stress - strain curves exhibit a universal nonlinear shape , which can be predicted from a thermal van der waals equation of state with excluded volume . this analysis indicates that many - body interactions contribute a significant fraction of the stress supported by the heap . 










selectin - mediated tumor cell tethering to host cells , such as vascular endothelial cells , is a critical step in the process of cancer metastasis . we recently identified sialofucosylated mucin16 ( MUC16 ) and podocalyxin ( PODXL ) as the major functional E- and l-selectin ligands expressed on the surface of metastatic pancreatic cancer cells . while the biophysics of leukocyte binding to selectins has been well studied , little is known about the mechanics of selectin - mediated adhesion pertinent to cancer metastasis . we thus sought to evaluate the critical parameters of selectin - mediated pancreatic tumor cell tethering and rolling . using force spectroscopy , we characterized the binding interactions of MUC16 and PODXL to E- and l-selectin at the single - molecule level . to further analyze the response of these molecular interactions under physiologically relevant regimes , we used a microfluidic assay in conjunction with a mathematical model to study the biophysics of selectin - ligand binding as a function of fluid shear stress . we demonstrate that both MUC16 and PODXL-E-selectin - mediated interactions are mechanically stronger than like l-selectin interactions at the single - molecule level , and display a higher binding frequency at all contact times . the single - molecule kinetic and micromechanical properties of selectin - ligand bonds , along with the number of receptor - ligand bonds needed to initiate tethering , regulate the average velocity of ligand - coated microspheres rolling on selectin - coated surfaces in shear flow . understanding the biophysics of selectin - ligand bonds and their responses to physiologically relevant shear stresses is vital for developing diagnostic assays and / or preventing the metastatic spread of tumor cells by interfering with selectin - mediated adhesion . 









































microfluidic droplet formation at a t-junction in the jetting regime was studied theoretically and an analytical force balance model was proposed to predict the diameter of droplets . the forces governing droplet production in the jetting regime include the shear , interfacial tension , linear momentum and inertial forces . experiments were carried with non-Newtonian xanthan gum solutions as the dispersed phase . the model predicted the diameters for both the experimental results and published results in the literature to within ± <nUm> % . this result is reasonable considering that no fitting parameters were used , and the reasons for this error are discussed . the magnitudes of the forces controlling droplet formation process are also compared in the paper . 
















this paper focuses on the experimental analysis of convective heat transfer characteristics of pressure - driven gaseous flows through microtubes , which is frequently encountered in practical application of microfluidic devices accommodating gas flow , heat transfer and / or chemical reactions at micro scale . the present work has been carried out with the objectives to : ( i ) experimentally verify the applicability of conventional theory for the prediction of the internal forced convection heat transfer coefficient for tubes having an inner diameter lower than <nUm> mm and ( ii ) check the performance of some specific correlations proposed for the analysis of forced microconvection with gases in the last decades . single commercial stainless steel microtubes are tested having an inner diameter between <nUm> and <nUm> mm . the most common thermal boundary conditions , namely uniform heat flux ( H boundary condition ) and uniform wall temperature ( T boundary condition ) , have been experimentally obtained by applying joule heating on the external surface of the microtubes ( H b.c. ) and by immerging the microtube in water with a fixed temperature by means of a thermostatic bath ( T b.c. ) . the design of the test section has been made with care in order to ensure the needed experiment reliability and to improve the accuracy of microconvective tests at microscale . experimental tests have been performed in both laminar and transitional flow regimes , with reynolds number between <nUm> and <nUm> . the values of nusselt number are experimentally determined and compared with both conventional theory and the prediction of the specific correlations developed for microchannels . 






the controlled and directed focusing of particles within flowing fluids is a problem of fundamental and technological significance . microfluidic inertial focusing provides passive and precise lateral and longitudinal alignment of small particles without the need for external actuation or sheath fluid . the benefits of inertial focusing have quickly enabled the development of miniaturized flow cytometers , size - selective sorting devices , and other high - throughput particle screening tools . straight channel inertial focusing device design requires knowledge of fluid properties and particle - channel size ratio . equilibrium behavior of inertially focused particles has been extensively characterized and the constitutive phenomena described by scaling relationships for straight channels of square and rectangular cross section . In concentrated particle suspensions , however , long - range hydrodynamic repulsions give rise to complex particle ordering that , while interesting and potentially useful , can also dramatically diminish the technique 's effectiveness for high - throughput particle handling applications . we have empirically investigated particle focusing behavior within channels of increasing aspect ratio and have identified three scaling regimes that produce varying degrees of geometrical ordering between focused particles . to explore the limits of inertial particle focusing and identify the origins of these long - range interparticle forces , we have explored equilibrium focusing behavior as a function of channel geometry and particle concentration . experimental results for highly concentrated particle solutions identify equilibrium thresholds for focusing that scale weakly with concentration and strongly with channel geometry . balancing geometry mediated inertial forces with estimates for interparticle repulsive forces now provide a complete picture of pattern formation among concentrated inertially focused particles and enhance our understanding of the fundamental limits of inertial focusing for technological applications . 












microscopic flows are almost universally linear , laminar , and stationary because the reynolds number , Re , is usually very small . that impedes mixing in microfluidic devices , which sometimes limits their performance . here , we show that truly chaotic flow can be generated in a smooth microchannel of a uniform width at arbitrarily low Re , if a small amount of flexible polymers is added to the working liquid . the chaotic flow regime is characterized by randomly fluctuating three - dimensional velocity field and significant growth of the flow resistance . although the size of the polymer molecules extended in the flow may become comparable to the microchannel width , the flow behavior is fully compatible with that in a macroscopic channel in the regime of elastic turbulence . the chaotic flow leads to quite efficient mixing , which is almost diffusion independent . for macromolecules , mixing time in this microscopic flow can be three to four orders of magnitude shorter than due to molecular diffusion . 





A system which can mass produce millimetre sized spherical polymer shells economically and with high precision will be a great step towards the inertial fusion energy goal . microfluidics has shown itself to be a disruptive technology , where a rapid and continuous production of compound emulsions can be processed into such shells . planar emulsion generators co-flow-focus in one step ( COFON ) and cascaded co-flow- focus ( COFUS ) enable millimetre compound emulsions to be produced using a one or two step formation process respectively . the co-flow-focus geometry uses symmetric and curved carrier fluid entrance walls to create a focusing orifice - minima and a carrier flow which aids movement and shaping of the dispersed fluid ( s ) towards the outlet , whilst maintaining operation in the dripping regime . precision concentric alignment of these compound emulsions remains one of the greatest challenges . however steps to solve this passively using curved channel modulation to perturbate the emulsion have shown that rapid alignment can be achieved . issues with satellite droplet formation , repeatability of the emulsion generation and cost are also addressed . 











A device focusing on measuring flow in the molecular flow regime through nanochannels is presented . the apparatus is based on pressure driven flow , which is important for microelectromechanical ( MEMS ) , nanomechanical - electrical systems ( NEMS ) and a wide range of other applications . the device is tested in the slip flow regime , but also flow in the knudsen regime in parallel nanochannels can be measured . knudsen numbers at the inlet between <nUm> and <nUm> are tested experimentally in this paper and is compared with theory . In addition , the functionality for kn > <nUm> is also discussed , based on theoretical work . the setup had been tested for a channel with <nUm> ± <nUm> mm diameter and a length of <nUm> mm validating its ability to measure a wide range of flow regimes in different kind of samples . argon gas is used for measuring the flow through the microchannel . 




we investigate the failure of bacterial floc mediated streamers in a microfluidic device in a creeping flow regime using both experimental observations and analytical modeling . the quantification of streamer deformation and failure behavior is possible due to the use of <nUm> nm fluorescent polystyrene beads which firmly embed in the extracellular polymeric substance ( EPS ) and act as tracers . the streamers , which form soon after the commencement of flow begin to deviate from an apparently quiescent fully formed state in spite of steady background flow and limited mass accretion indicating significant mechanical nonlinearity . this nonlinear behavior shows distinct phases of deformation with mutually different characteristic times and comes to an end with a distinct localized failure of the streamer far from the walls . we investigate this deformation and failure behavior for two separate bacterial strains and develop a simplified but nonlinear analytical model describing the experimentally observed instability phenomena assuming a necking route to instability . our model leads to a power law relation between the critical strain at failure and the fluid velocity scale exhibiting excellent qualitative and quantitative agreeing with the experimental rupture behavior . 































In this paper , we present a novel method for vortex generation and control in a resonator - shaped microfluidic chamber with actuations . by varying the actuation conditions , including the working transducers , frequency , and voltage , two regimes of vortices , clockwise vortex ( CW vortex ) and counter-clockwise vortex ( CCW vortex ) , are generated in the chamber . we show that the direction of the vortex can be conveniently shifted from clockwise to counterclockwise by switching the working transducers without interrupting the flow , and the intensity of the vortex can be regulated by the actuation frequency and voltage . it is proposed that the vortex generation in the present case is due to the instability of the actuation - induced pulsatile flow through the sudden expansion part at the outlet of the chamber , while the vortex control is realized through the asymmetric flows in the chamber induced by the upper or lower transducers . the reported method of vortex generation and control can be applied in microfluidic operations for mixing enhancement of multiple reagents and distribution of microparticles and nanoparticles . 

surface acoustic waves ( SAWs ) can be used to drive liquids in portable microfluidic chips via the acoustic counterflow phenomenon . In this video we present the fabrication protocol for a multilayered SAW acoustic counterflow device . the device is fabricated starting from a lithium niobate ( LN ) substrate onto which two interdigital transducers ( IDTs ) and appropriate markers are patterned . A polydimethylsiloxane ( PDMS ) channel cast on an SU8 master mold is finally bonded on the patterned substrate . following the fabrication procedure , we show the techniques that allow the characterization and operation of the acoustic counterflow device in order to pump fluids through the PDMS channel grid . we finally present the procedure to visualize liquid flow in the channels . the protocol is used to show on - chip fluid pumping under different flow regimes such as laminar flow and more complicated dynamics characterized by vortices and particle accumulation domains . 






the objective of this study was to evaluate the accumulation of biomass , plant biometrics and production of watermelon fruit submitted to changes in source and drain relations . the experiment was conducted in the experimental area of the CCTA / UFCG , PB , brazil , during the period from september to december , <nUm> . seed of the cultivar " crimson sweet " were used and the treatments were allocated in <nUm> × <nUm> split plots , with four replications . plots consisted of plants grown with different number of fruits ( <nUm> and <nUm> ) and the subplots with dominant stem pruning in different growing seasons ( <nUm> , <nUm> , <nUm> and <nUm> days after transplanting - DAT ) . growth characteristics were evaluated . the modifications induced in watermelons by dominant stem pruning and fruit thinning provided changes in photoassimilate partitions and plant production . the modifications induced in watermelons by dominant stem pruning and fruit thinning provided changes in biomass accumulation , biometrics and the watermelon production of fruits . the thinning of plant 's drain ( fruit ) resulted in more dry mass accumulation of leaves when comparing to fruit , providing a higher total dry mass . plants grown with two fruits presented the highest harvest index and the highest production , with reduced fruit size . the stem pruning of seedlings at <nUm> days after transplanting promoted a higher growth and production of watermelon fruits . 
watermelon is an important vegetable species in terms of amount produced and commercial value in turkey and worldwide . In our country , the majority of watermelon consumers think that fruit internal quality is directly related with size . however , interest in medium- and mini-sized watermelons is increasing in recent years for reasons such as transport and consumption convenience . In recent years , mini watermelons have begun to replace large watermelons in supermarkets , especially in big cities . the seeds of these varieties are totally imported from abroad . the aim of this study was to start a breeding program to develop seeded and seedless mini watermelon F1 hybrid cultivars . to this aim , we selfed <nUm> mini watermelon lines and characterized them according to UPOV criteria . we examined total yield , flower initiation , main stem length , node number on main stem , main stem diameter , fruit weight , fruit length , fruit diameter , rind thickness , total soluble solids , seed number per fruit and 1000-seed weight . according to our results , <nUm> lines showed different levels of variation from each other for plant , leaf , flower , fruit and seed characters . 







mixing fluid samples or reactants is a paramount function in the fields of micro total analysis system ( mTAS ) and microchemical processing . however , rapid and efficient fluid mixing is difficult to achieve inside microchannels because of the difficulty of diffusive mass transfer in the laminar regime of the typical microfluidic flows . it has been well recorded that the mixing efficiency can be boosted by migrating from two - dimensional ( 2D ) to three - dimensional ( 3D ) geometries . although several 3D chaotic mixers have been designed , most of them offer a high mixing efficiency only in a very limited range of reynolds numbers ( Re ) . In this work , we developed a 3D fine - threaded lemniscate - shaped micromixer whose maximum numerical and empirical efficiency is around <nUm> % and <nUm> % , respectively , and maintains its high performance ( i.e. , > <nUm> % ) over a wide range of <nUm> < Re < <nUm> which meets the requirements of both the mTAS and microchemical process applications . the 3D micromixer was designed based on two distinct mixing strategies , namely , the inducing of chaotic advection by the presence of dean flow and diffusive mixing through thread - like grooves around the curved body of the mixers . first , a set of numerical simulations was performed to study the physics of the flow and to determine the essential geometrical parameters of the mixers . second , a simple and cost - effective method was exploited to fabricate the convoluted structure of the micromixers through the removal of a 3D-printed wax structure from a block of cured polydimethylsiloxane . finally , the fabricated mixers with different threads were tested using a fluorescent microscope demonstrating a good agreement with the results of the numerical simulation . we envisage that the strategy used in this work would expand the scope of the micromixer technology by broadening the range of efficient working flow rate and providing an easy way to the fabrication of 3D convoluted microstructures . 






A microfluidic sensor having multiple channel arrays connected in series is proposed to measure viscosities of the blood . since the shear rates for each array in the sensor are generated differently , viscosities at various shear rates can be obtained with a single flow rate condition . the functionality of the proposed sensor is demonstrated by both numerical and experimental studies . results from the studies show good agreement with the reference data ( less than <nUm> % in normalized deviation ) . 
the proceedings contain <nUm> papers . the topics discussed include : functional mapping of biological nano- and mesoscopic structures in complex biofluids ; simple and rapid formation of 3D co-culture cell laden microstructures by using cell origami technique ; origami - enabled artificial liver tissue ; vertically separated anisotropic 3D collagen microchamber array ; passive ' orthogonal flow mixers for homogeneous dissolution of reagents in microfluidics ; viscosity independent paper microfluidic imbibition ; high - resolution monitoring of liquid filling in microfluidics using capacitance measurements and longitudinal electrodes ; a toolkit of thread - based , microfluidic , pH sensor , electronic for medical diagnostics ; measurement of blood viscosities in a wide shear rate regime using a microfluidic sensor with multiple channel arrays connected in series ; and three - dimensional pancreatic islet - on - a - chip to investigate flow effects on islet survival and function . 
blood aggregation occurs when erythrocytes , red blood cells ( RBC ) , agglutinate together into compact stacks of cells called rouleaux . blood aggregation can then be compared to a liquid - gel transition that appears at low flow regime , and is responsible of the high value of the blood viscosity at low shear rate . this paper will present a physical device that can detect the appearing of this liquidgel transition using the transmission and reflection properties of ultrasonic waves . 












watermelon ( citrullus lanatus ) is usually minimally processed as cubes , edgecut damage being a remarkable defect . to avoid such disorder , processing as cylinders and using UV-C as sanitizing tool can be an interesting alternative to preserve quality during shelf life . the effect of UV-C radiation on overall quality , microbial growth , phenolics content and lycopene concentration of watermelon cylinders ( <nUm> cm φ ) of several lengths ( <nUm> , <nUm> , <nUm> and <nUm> cm ) were analyzed . after harvesting , fruits were washed ( <nUm> mL L-1 ClNaO ) , precooled and processed at <nUm> ° C . once removed the skin , fruits were manually cut as cylinders , exposed to <nUm> kJ UV-C m-2 and packaged in polypropylene packages under passive modified atmosphere . UV-C untreated cylinders were used as control . after <nUm> days at <nUm> ° C , O partial pressure was higher for the longest cylinders ( <nUm> kPa for <nUm> cm vs. <nUm> kPa for <nUm> cm ) with the lowest CO2 partial pressure ( <nUm> kPa for <nUm> cm vs. <nUm> kPa for <nUm> cm ) , indicating a higher respiration rate for the smaller sizes . A better sensory quality in <nUm> cm cylinders for both , control and UV-C treated , was observed . however , microbial growth was better controlled and phenolics content better maintained ( 60-80 mg CAE kg-1 fw ) in UV-C treated samples . lycopene content did not significantly decrease in any treatment . As conclusion , watermelon minimally processed as cylinders pretreated with <nUm> kJ UV-C m-2 can be stored for up to <nUm> days at <nUm> ° C without noticeable quality changes . 
watermelon is an important vegetable crop in terms of production amount and commercial value in turkey . watermelons are grouped according to fruit size as icebox , mini , medium , large and very large . In this study we measured <nUm> seeds with <nUm> replications of <nUm> mini watermelon lines according to following characters : seed weight , seed diameter , seed length and seed thickness . we also measured fruit weight , fruit length and fruit diameter of these lines . according to the research results ; it was determined that each of these parameters was statistically significant at a significance level of <nUm> % . line <nUm> and <nUm> had the heaviest ( <nUm> g seed-1 ) and lightest ( <nUm> g seed-1 ) seed weight , respectively . the highest seed width , length and thickness were measured in line <nUm> while line <nUm> , <nUm> , <nUm> and <nUm> had the shortest seed diameter ; while line <nUm> had the smallest seed size and thickness . In case of fruit weight except line <nUm> all <nUm> mini watermelon lines used in this study were in the same statistical group . line <nUm> had <nUm> g of fruit weight , while other fruit lines ranged from <nUm> to <nUm> g . fruit diameter values of the lines showed similar results with fruit weight ; <nUm> lines in the same statistical group with values between <nUm> - <nUm> cm , while line <nUm> came in last with <nUm> cm value . correlation analysis showed that fruit weight is highly correlated with fruit length and width . A significant correlation was also obtained between fruit length and fruit width . In case of seed characteristics only seed length was positively correlated with seed width . 











microfluidic devices create precisely controlled reactive blood flows and typically involve : ( i ) validated anticoagulation / pharmacology protocols , ( ii ) defined reactive surfaces , ( iii ) defined flow - transport regimes , and ( iv ) optical imaging . an 8-channel device can be run at constant flow rate or constant pressure drop for blood perfusion over a patterned collagen , collagen / kaolin , or collagen / tissue factor ( TF ) to measure platelet , thrombin , and fibrin dynamics during clot growth . A membrane - flow device delivers a constant flux of platelet agonists or coagulation enzymes into flowing blood . A trifurcated device sheaths a central blood flow on both sides with buffer , an ideal approach for on - chip recalcification of citrated blood or drug delivery . A side - view device allows clotting on a porous collagen / TF plug at constant pressure differential across the developing clot . the core - shell architecture of clots made in mouse models can be replicated in this device using human blood . for pathological flows , a stenosis device achieves shear rates of > <nUm> s(-1) to drive plasma von willebrand factor ( VWF ) to form thick long fibers on collagen . similarly , a micropost - impingement device creates extreme elongational and shear flows for VWF fiber formation without collagen . overall , microfluidics are ideal for studies of clotting , bleeding , fibrin polymerization / fibrinolysis , cell / clot mechanics , adhesion , mechanobiology , and reaction - transport dynamics . 



























wound repair is a key feature distinguishing living from nonliving matter . single cells are increasingly recognized to be capable of healing wounds . the lack of reproducible , high - throughput wounding methods has hindered single - cell wound repair studies . this work describes a microfluidic guillotine for bisecting single stentor coeruleus cells in a continuous - flow manner . stentor is used as a model due to its robust repair capacity and the ability to perform gene knockdown in a high - throughput manner . local cutting dynamics reveals two regimes under which cells are bisected , one at low viscous stress where cells are cut with small membrane ruptures and high viability and one at high viscous stress where cells are cut with extended membrane ruptures and decreased viability . A cutting throughput up to <nUm> cells per minute - more than <nUm> times faster than current methods - is achieved . the method allows the generation of more than <nUm> cells in a synchronized stage of their repair process . this capacity , combined with high - throughput gene knockdown in stentor , enables time - course mechanistic studies impossible with current wounding methods . 





















AC electrokinetic flow is promising in designing microfluidic chips for manipulation of biological and chemical samples toward clinical diagnostics . four pieces of electrodes are optimized to enhance mixing effect inside a straight microchannel . In this research , the mixing dependency on the ionic strength of solutions is investigated . AC electroosmotic secondary flow is responsible for the mixing at low ionic strength ( σ < <nUm> mS m-1 ) , whereas AC electrothermal secondary flow is proposed to mix high conductive mediums ( σ > <nUm> mS m-1 ) . the electrode - electrolyte impedance analysis is employed to facilitate the in-situation mixing process by choosing appropriate electrical excitation parameters for the electrodes . 














the variability and low watermelon yields in northeastern brazil are linked to the lack of research on the fertilization management of culture . this experiment aimed to evaluate the watermelon production at soil under the levels cattle manure and potassium . the treatments were distributed in randomized block design with three replications and <nUm> plants per plot in factorial scheme <nUm> × <nUm> + <nUm> , referring to three cattle manure levels ( <nUm> <nUm> and <nUm> kg hole-1 ) , five K2O levels ( <nUm> ; <nUm> ; <nUm> ; <nUm> and <nUm> kg ha-1 ) , and one additional treatment ( without organic and mineral fertilizers ) . except additional treatment , the other treatments received nitrogen , in the form of urea ( <nUm> kg ha-1 N ) . were evaluated : number of fruits per plant , average fruit weight , productivity and fruit size ( longitudinal diameter fruit - LDF and equatorial diameter fruit - EDF ) . the K2O levels supplied were not sufficient to raise the average mass of watermelon fruits to satisfactory values . the <nUm> kg dose of bovine manure was the one that promoted higher values of productivity . the increase in the dose of manure reduced the need for potassic fertilizer to increase the productivity of watermelon plants . 











AC electro-osmotic flow is a promising technique in microfluidic manipulation . AC electroosmotic force has been generated inside a novel twisted micro channel in order to overcome the low reynolds number fluid . the behavior of concentration distribution has been investigated by solving the transient electric field , fluid mechanic and convectiondiffusion theory inside the channel . two particles have been released inside the channel to investigate the efficiency of generated chaotic regime . velocity streamlines and perturbation of species concentration reveal high performance stirring process which above <nUm> % mixing efficiency achieved for <nUm> mm channel length . the efficiency increases by increasing the applied voltage amplitude . geometrical and exciting parameters have been optimized in order to maximize the efficiency of mixing process and avoid electrolysis and sample damage . 














traditionally no - slip and temperature - jump conditions in fluid mechanics are modelled using a linear first order mathematical model to incorporate the tangential momentum accommodation coefficient ( TMAC ) at a fluid - solid interface , however this formulation is only generally accurate at macroscopic length scales and pressures for knudsen numbers in which the dominant flow regime is such that the continuum assumption is valid . In this paper we consider the application of a nonlinear slip model for the specification of the boundary conditions in the extended navier - stokes system of PDE 's . A numerical discretization scheme is developed for a 2D couette - poiseuille problem to simulate microfluidic flow in the interface gap of a piston-cylinder pressure balance with application to an absolute pressure primary scientific standard . 









































the proceedings contain <nUm> papers . the special focus in this conference is on bioinformatics and biomedical engineering . the topics include : discrimination between normal driving and braking intention from driver 's brain signals ; unsupervised parametrization of nano-objects in electron microscopy ; models of multiple interactions from collinear patterns ; identification of the treatment survivability gene biomarkers of breast cancer patients via a tree - based approach ; workflows and service discovery : A mobile device approach ; chloroplast genomes exhibit eight - cluster structuredness and mirror symmetry ; are radiosensitive and regular response cells homogeneous in their correlations between copy number state and surviving fraction after irradiation ? ; protein tertiary structure prediction via SVD and PSO sampling ; fighting fire with fire : computational prediction of microbial targets for bacteriocins ; SARAEasy : A mobile app for cerebellar syndrome quantification and characterization ; a graph - based approach for querying protein - ligand structural patterns ; predicting disease genes from clinical single sample - based PPI networks ; red blood cell model validation in dynamic regime ; exploiting ladder networks for gene expression classification ; simulation of blood flow in microfluidic devices for analysing of video from real experiments ; alignment - free z-curve genomic cepstral coefficients and machine learning for classification of viruses ; a combined approach of multiscale texture analysis and interest point / corner detectors for microcalcifications diagnosis ; an empirical study of word sense disambiguation for biomedical information retrieval system ; modelling the release of moxifloxacin from plasma grafted intraocular lenses with rotational symmetric numerical framework ; predicting tumor locations in prostate cancer tissue using gene expression ; case - based reasoning systems for medical applications with improved adaptation and recovery stages . 


the proceedings contain <nUm> papers . the special focus in this conference is on bioinformatics and biomedical engineering . the topics include : discrimination between normal driving and braking intention from driver 's brain signals ; unsupervised parametrization of nano-objects in electron microscopy ; models of multiple interactions from collinear patterns ; identification of the treatment survivability gene biomarkers of breast cancer patients via a tree - based approach ; workflows and service discovery : A mobile device approach ; chloroplast genomes exhibit eight - cluster structuredness and mirror symmetry ; are radiosensitive and regular response cells homogeneous in their correlations between copy number state and surviving fraction after irradiation ? ; protein tertiary structure prediction via SVD and PSO sampling ; fighting fire with fire : computational prediction of microbial targets for bacteriocins ; SARAEasy : A mobile app for cerebellar syndrome quantification and characterization ; a graph - based approach for querying protein - ligand structural patterns ; predicting disease genes from clinical single sample - based PPI networks ; red blood cell model validation in dynamic regime ; exploiting ladder networks for gene expression classification ; simulation of blood flow in microfluidic devices for analysing of video from real experiments ; alignment - free z-curve genomic cepstral coefficients and machine learning for classification of viruses ; a combined approach of multiscale texture analysis and interest point / corner detectors for microcalcifications diagnosis ; an empirical study of word sense disambiguation for biomedical information retrieval system ; modelling the release of moxifloxacin from plasma grafted intraocular lenses with rotational symmetric numerical framework ; predicting tumor locations in prostate cancer tissue using gene expression ; case - based reasoning systems for medical applications with improved adaptation and recovery stages . 































none 








































the proceedings contain <nUm> papers . the topics discussed include : stochastic resonance enhances DNA transport in the entropic trapping regime ; probing the basset force acting on a particle undergoing AC electrophoresis ; joule heating effects on fluid and particle transport in insulator - based dielectrophoresis devices ; impact of material morphology on bioseparations in nanocomposite hydrogels : a modeling approach in an annular channel ; AC electrohydrodynamic flows in flame plasmas ; dielectrophoretic assessment of microparticle dielectric properties employing a planar carbon electrode platform ; the effect of disorder on DNA dynamics in post arrays during electrophoresis ; effects of cell shape on electrokinetic immobilization efficiency in insulator - based dielectrophoretic devices ; two - phase microfluidic flow system for the isolation of circulating melanoma cells detected using photo - acoustics ; multiplexed detection of viral nucleic acids in a combinatorial microfluidic screening chip ; scanning helium ion microscope (HIM)-milled solid - state nanopores : fabrication and application to biomolecule detection ; diffusionless particle separation in coherent arrays of flow perturbers ; on - chip sample preparation and nucleic acid profiling using isotachophoresis ; effect of the debye screening parameter and electrolyte valence on the transport of ions in nanochannels ; and role of material morphology on electrophoresis of bio-molecules : effect of poiseuille flow . 












traditional fabrication techniques for microfluidic devices utilize a planar chip format that possesses limited control over the geometry of and materials placement around microchannel cross-sections . this imposes restrictions on the design of flow fields and external forces ( electric , magnetic , piezoelectric , etc. ) that can be imposed onto fluids and particles . here we report a method of fabricating microfluidic channels with complex cross-sections . A scaled-up version of a microchannel is dimensionally reduced through a thermal drawing process , enabling the fabrication of meters - long microfluidic fibers with nonrectangular cross-sectional shapes , such as crosses , five - pointed stars , and crescents . In addition , by codrawing compatible materials , conductive domains can be integrated at arbitrary locations along channel walls . we validate this technology by studying unexplored regimes in hydrodynamic flow and by designing a high - throughput cell separation device . by enabling these degrees of freedom in microfluidic device design , fiber microfluidics provides a method to create microchannel designs that are inaccessible using planar techniques . 























































<nUm> 








































































we present an experimental study of the aggregation of paramagnetic particles , in the presence of controlled laminar shear flow , conducted in microchannels subjected to an external magnetic field . the microfluidic channels are made of either glass / silicon or polydimethylsiloxane . In ranges of time up to hundreds of seconds , the growth mechanism of the linear chain consists of the accumulation of isolated particles or small clusters onto existing chains , which are all moving at different speeds . In this time regime the chain length increases linearly and has a growth rate that increases as a power law with the shear . At longer times the chain lengths saturate . the smoluchovski model , which assumes single particle - chain interactions only , closely reproduces the observations both qualitatively and quantitatively . In particular , the evolution of the growth rate of the mean chain length with respect to the shear rate S , predicted as S1 / <nUm> , is found to be consistent with the experiments . 
