© 2002 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. All rights reserved.Considerable gains have recently been made in the research of polymer catalysis which has emerged from the interaction of the fields of macromolecular, coordination and catalytic chemistry. Using synthetic macromolecules one can create polymeric catalysts which function like enzymes and almost simulate their activity and selectivity. Consequently, polymer catalysis could enable the high-yield manufacture of industrially important products at low-reaction volumes involving minimal energy consumption. Catalytically active metal complexes fixed on polymeric supports can be essential in solving some important problems encountered by the chemical and petrochemical industry. Heterogeneous metal complex catalysts can be regarded as a novel class of catalysts which combine the advantages of both homogeneous and heterogeneous systems and which possess high activity and selectivity, specific character and stability in operation. Hence, this area is a significant field of catalytic chemistry. This monograph intends to acquaint the reader with the basic material available in the field of catalysis. Because this field was previously treated as a marginal area of polymer and catalytic chemistry, the authors mostly cite recent literature sources. It covers the catalytic properties of a broad class of functional polymers and their metalion complexes as well as ionite and heterogeneous (polymer-supported) metal-complex catalysis. The first chapter of the book deals with enzyme-like catalysis by synthetic polymers - catalysis by polymeric acids and bases, amphoteric polyelectrolytes and nonionic polymers. Because coordination compounds of metal ions with macromolecular ligands are interesting with regard to bioinorganic chemistry, this book elucidates some problems involving the catalysis by water-soluble polymer-metal complexes. Ester hydrolysis, hydrogen peroxide decomposition, oxidation of disubstituted phenols, hydroquinones, mercaptoalcohols and other types of reaction are chosen as model processes. A section devoted to interfacial catalysis is also included. The second chapter handles various problems regarding catalysis by ion-exchange resins. Mechanisms of reactions involving acidic and basic resins are discussed. In respect of the wide use of anion-exchange resins as interfacial transfer catalysts, attention is paid to the specific nature of this reaction. Similarities and differences in the catalysis of non-ionic resins and linear polyelectrolytes are shown. The third chapter presents different methods of production of heterogenized homogeneous catalysts from complexes of transition metals and polymer matrices. Different ways of fixing a homogeneous metal complex on a polymeric support (encapsulation, covalent bond, coordination bond, ion exchange and gel immobilization) were investigated. The catalytic activity of Group VIII metals fixed on different polymeric supports as well as the problems of their control are elaborated. In some cases the working mechanisms of heterogenized catalytic systems are analyzed. Particular attention is paid to the effect of matrix isolation of catalytically active centers on the reactivity of heterogenized metal-complex catalysts, longevity and leaching problems as well as to methods of reducing leaching. The effect of the combined properties of a polymer matrix, metal ions and a solvent on catalyst activity and selectivity is depicted. In conclusion, general problems of the catalysis both by functional groups of polymers and by their metal complexes are discussed. An attempt is made to illustrate some characteristic properties of such metal complexes and to outline promising directions of research in this expanding field.
