OBJECTIVESArterial graft spasm occasionally causes circulatory collapse immediately following coronary artery bypass graft. The aim of this study is to evaluate the efficacy of our developed materials, which were composed of milrinone (phosphodiesterase III inhibitor) or diltiazem (calcium-channel blocker), with nano-scaled fibre made of biodegradable polymer to prevent arterial spasm.METHODSMilrinone- or diltiazem-releasing biodegradable nano-scaled fibres were fabricated by an electrospinning procedure. In vivo milrinone- or diltiazem-releasing tests were performed to confirm the sustained release of the drugs. An in vivo arterial spasm model was established by subcutaneous injection of noradrenalin around the rat femoral artery. Rats were randomly divided into four groups as follows: those that received 5 mg of milrinone-releasing biodegradable nano-scaled fibre (group M, n = 14); 5 mg of diltiazem-releasing biodegradable nano-scaled fibre (group D, n = 12); or those that received fibre without drugs (as a control; group C, n = 14) implanted into the rat femoral artery. In the fourth group, sham operation was performed (group S, n = 10). One day after the implantation, noradrenalin was injected in all groups. The femoral arterial blood flow was measured continuously before and after noradrenalin injection. The maximum blood flow before noradrenalin injection and minimum blood flow after noradrenalin injection were measured.RESULTSIn vivo drug-releasing test revealed that milrinone-releasing biodegradable nano-scaled fibre released 78% of milrinone and diltiazem-releasing biodegradable nano-scaled fibre released 50% diltiazem on the first day. The ratios of rat femoral artery blood flow after/before noradrenalin injection in groups M (0.74 ± 0.16) and D (0.72 ± 0.05) were significantly higher than those of groups C (0.54 ± 0.09) and S (0.55 ± 0.16) (P < 0.05).CONCLUSIONNoradrenalin-induced rat femoral artery spasm was inhibited by the implantation of milrinone-releasing biodegradable nano-scaled fibre or diltiazem-releasing biodegradable nano-scaled fibre. These results suggested that our materials might be effective for the prevention of arterial graft spasm after coronary artery bypass graft. © 2013 The Author. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European Association for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery. All rights reserved.
