© 2015 American Chemical Society.This contribution reports the first chemoselective, stereospecific, and living polymerization of polar divinyl monomers, enabled by chiral ansa-zirconocenium catalysts through an enantiomorphic-site controlled coordination-addition polymerization mechanism. Silyl-bridged-ansa-zirconocenium ester enolate 2 has been synthesized and structurally characterized, but it exhibits low to negligible activity and stereospecificity in the polymerization of polar divinyl monomers including vinyl methacrylate (VMA), allyl methacrylate (AMA), 4-vinylbenzyl methacrylate (VBMA), and N,N-diallyl acrylamide (DAA). In contrast, ethylene-bridged-ansa-zirconocenium ester enolate 1 is highly active and stereospecific in the polymerization of such monomers including AMA, VBMA, and DAA. The polymerization by 1 is perfectly chemoselective for all four polar divinyl monomers, proceeding exclusively through conjugate addition across the methacrylic C=C bond, while leaving the pendant C=C bonds intact. The polymerization of DAA is most stereospecific and controlled, producing essentially stereoperfect isotactic PDAA with [mmmm] > 99%, M<inf>n</inf> matching the theoretical value (thus a quantitative initiation efficiency), and a narrow molecular weight distribution (Crossed D sign = 1.06-1.16). The stereospecificity is slightly lower for the AMA polymerization but still leading to highly isotactic poly(allyl methacrylate) (PAMA) with 95-97% [mm]. The polymerization of VBMA is further less stereospecific, affording PVBMA with 90-94% [mm], while the polymerization VMA is least stereospecific. Several lines of evidence from both homo- and block copolymerization results have demonstrated living characteristics of the AMA polymerization by 1. Mechanistic studies of this polymerization have yielded a monometallic coordination-addition polymerization mechanism involving the eight-membered chelating intermediate. Post-functionalization of isotactic polymers bearing the pendant vinyl group on every repeating unit via the thiol-ene "click" reaction achieves a full conversion of all the pendant double bonds to the corresponding thioether bonds. Photocuring of such isotactic polymers is also successful, producing an elastic material readily characterizable by dynamic mechanical analysis. (Figure Presented).
