Metallocene alkyl cations for polymerization of olefins possess two active sites involved in migratory insertion. Site epimerization, with an inversion at the metal atom, is considered to be one of the major causes for break-down of the alternating propagation model, resulting in stereoerrors whenever the two catalytic sites have substantially different enantioface selectivities. Density functional theory has been used to determine the intrinsic reaction coordinate that connects the optimized minima and transition states of inversion in the parent ansa-zirconocene [{H2C(Cp)2}Zr-Pr]+ (Pr = n-propyl). These calculations yield a three-step reaction path for site epimerization. Starting from the pyramidal β-agostic complex, an activated rotation around the Zr-Pr bond first produces an α-agostic conformation. Continued rotation leads to an equivalent second α-agostic intermediate and then finally to the inverted β-agostic complex. The second step is rate-determining and proceeds through a planar three-coordinate transition state. In the case of [{H2C(Cp)2}Zr-iBu]+ (iBu = iso-butyl), the situation is more complicated, because there are several interconvertible α-, β- and γ-agostic intermediates, but the rate-limiting step is again an inversion process connecting two different α-agostic conformers with the alkyl group on opposite enantiosides. For both ansa-zirconocene catalysts, the computed free-energy barriers for epimerization are around 11-12 kcal/mol and almost independent of temperature, while those for insertion increase with temperature due to the entropic cost of association. According to the computational results for the isolated catalysts, insertion remains favored over epimerization for the experimentally relevant temperature range in the n-propyl case, whereas both processes are competitive in the iso-butyl case. Inclusion of bulk solvent effects by a continuum solvation model does not affect the results much, while explicit consideration of a coordinating counterion causes larger changes. The present model calculations on the role of site epimerization should thus be most relevant for propene polymerization with non-coordinating counterions. © 2006 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
