© 2018, Pleiades Publishing, Ltd. Polymerization of methyl methacrylate, initiated by benzoyl peroxide in the presence of titanocene dichloride, is considered from the point of view of formal kinetics. Based on the kinetic scheme of the process (which includes the reactions of classical radical polymerization, the reaction of benzoyl peroxide with titanocene dichloride, the reactions of the controlled radical polymerization of organometallic mediated radical polymerization (OMRP) and atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP), the reaction of the formation of a coordinating active site and the coordinating chain propagation on a mathematical model of the kinetics of the process is created. This model also makes it possible to calculate the molecular-mass characteristics of poly(methyl methacrylate). As a result of the solution of the inverse kinetic problem at a temperature of 343 K, the values of the reaction rate constants of the kinetic scheme are found under which the discrepancy between the calculated models and experimental data is minimal. Using the developed model of the kinetics of the process, a numerical experiment is performed (i.e., a direct kinetic problem is solved). This problem revealed the following regularities of the process. (1) An increase in the initial concentration of titanocene dichloride at a constant initial concentration of benzoyl peroxide leads to an increase in the rate of consumption of benzoyl peroxide but not to an increase in the initial rate of the process compared to classical radical polymerization. (2) With an increase in the initial concentration of titanocene dichloride, the lifetime of the macroradicals at the initial stage of the process is reduced, and hence the molecular weight of the resulting polymethyl methacrylate is less than that of the polymethyl methacrylate obtained in the absence of titanocene dichloride, and it will increase during the process of approaching the final values. (3) During the polymerization of methyl methacrylate, initiated by benzoyl peroxide in the presence of titanocene dichloride, a smoothing gel effect (as in the case of the polymerization of methyl methacrylate initiated by benzoyl peroxide in the presence of ferrocene) does not occur since titanocene dichloride forms stable complexes with methyl methacrylate and, consequently, it participates in reactions consuming macroradicals to a lesser degree than ferrocene.
