We have studied for the first time the ability of a conducting polymer film, p(Tc3Py), representing a polypyrrole matrix with covalently attached titanocene dichloride (TcCl2) centers, to serve as an intermediator for the electron charge transport between the electrode and the reaction sites of solute reactants. The standard potential of the first of these electroactive species, ferrocene (Fc), is in the range where the polymer matrix is in its slightly oxidized state so that solute Fc species give a reversible response at the surface of this modified electrode. Another solute reactant, TcCl 2, was studied in solutions in which it demonstrates a (quasi)reversible behavior at bare electrode surfaces, THF+ TBAPF6 and AN + TEACl. The standard redox potential of this species belongs to the range of the electroactivity of immobilized TcCl2 centers (where the matrix is in its non-conducting state) so that the electron charge has to be transported via stepwise redox reactions between neighboring centers inside the film. The combination, solute reactant + film, results in a greater CV current compared to the response of the film in background solution or of the solute species at the bare electrode surface. This current for THF solution even exceeds the sum of separate currents for the film and the reactant. This finding is attributed to a catalytic effect of solute species as redox intermediators for the transformation of immobilized electroactive centers leading to a greater degree of the film reduction. The presence of solute TcCl2 species results in a much greater stability of immobilized centers (compared to the corresponding reactant-free solution), both in the course of CV with the passage of the range of their response and in experiments with the film holding at the potential within this range. This holding leads to an almost constant current related to the reaction of solute species at the film/ solution interface. Our estimate shows that immobilized centers undergo above 10,000 reversible transformations (without an observed tendency to the degradation) to ensure the passage of this current. The conclusion has been drawn that immobilized TcCl2 centers are able to serve as sufficiently stable redox intermediators for the electron charge transport across the film, a prerequisite for the catalytic applications of such films. © Springer-Verlag 2004.
