This chapter covers the discovery that enabled, for the first time, the manufacturing of high molecular weight, highly stereoregular syndiotactic polypropylene polymers with narrow molecular weight distribution via the new class of metallocene molecules with bridged cyclopentadienyl-fluorenyl ligands. First, the salient crystal structural features of the neutral metallocene molecules and the crystal structure of the corresponding mono-alkyl- zirconocenium cation is introduced. Then, by employing the structural and geometrical data, a realistic working model for the active site precursor is developed and presented. The stereochemistry of the catalytic propylene poly-insertion reaction and the formation of syndiotactic polypropylene according to the enantiomorphic site control mechanism at the enantiotopic cationic active sites, formed after the activation of the prochiral metallocene dichloride with methylaluminoxane, MAO, is reviewed and further delineated. In the following sections, the impact of the introduction of substituents with proper size and composition at some selected positions of the ligand is discussed and the methods for increasing the molecular weight and stereoregularity of syndiotactic polypropylene polymers are elaborated. With the aid of computational calculations on real and hypothetical catalyst systems with substitutionally altered ligand structures, it is shown that the degree of enantioselectivity of syndiospecific catalyst systems can be determined and/or predicted for these systems quantitatively and with high precision. The calculations confirm that the introduction of substituent(s) reinforcing the preferential conformational orientation of the polymer chain enhances the overall enantioselectivity of the active site, and to certain extends stereoselectivity in general, by affecting the site epimerization processes. The computational calculations reveal that to account correctly for the frequency of the site epimerization-dependent m-type stereo-errors it is essential to include the counter-ion, as an integrated part of the catalyst system, into the calculations. The relevance of the symmetry and stereorigidity of the metallocene structure for the syndiospecificity of the final catalyst is debated by presenting a few "non-conforming" catalyst examples. Finally, the challenges involved in the manufacture of syndiotactic polypropylene in commercial scale continuous production processes are highlighted as well as the polymer's unique structural, physical, mechanical and rheological properties. © 2013 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg.
