Titanium is a strong, low-density element with a diverse variety of applications in fields such as the aerospace and automotive industries, biomedical implants, electronics, solar cells, polymerization catalysts, and photocatalysts. In many instances, the local environment of Ti has a substantial influence on the physical and electronic properties of these materials. Solid-state NMR (SSNMR) is an increasingly popular non-destructive avenue for obtaining rich, detailed information regarding titanium and its surroundings. The two NMR-active isotopes of titanium, 47 and 49, have very similar properties, which often leads to overlapping resonances and complicated SSNMR spectra. Despite these challenges, many researchers have successfully utilized 47/49 SSNMR experiments to gain a unique molecular-level understanding of the local electronic, magnetic, and structural environment about titanium. Ti NMR parameters are strongly correlated to distinct structural features (e.g., TiO6 octahedral distortion).This review takes the reader on a comprehensive tour of 47/49 SSNMR spectroscopy spanning ca. 60 publications, from the first report in 1963 to the current state of the art in 2015. We begin with an introduction to the element of titanium, its properties, isotopes, and impressive range of applications. An introduction to the relevant NMR interactions and their parameters is then provided, followed by a discussion of various pulse sequences and strategies for 47/49 SSNMR signal enhancement, and a breakdown of the various compounds that have been used for 47/49 chemical shift referencing. The main literature review is grouped according to the nature of Ti materials: Ti metal, TiH2/TiD2 and their stoichiometric derivatives, BaTiO3 and SrTiO3, the three polymorphs of TiO2 (rutile, anatase, and brookite), ATiO3-type compounds (A=metal, e.g., perovskite and ilmenite), intermetallic and binary Ti compounds, porous and layered materials, and practical applications of 47/49 SSNMR spectroscopy in recent times. Considering the tremendous advances in the field within the last two decades, 47/49 SSNMR spectroscopy shows great promise for routine, detailed characterization of Ti alloys, compounds, and nanomaterials both today and in the future. © 2016 Elsevier Ltd.
