© 2010 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. All rights reserved.Organometallic complexes, based on group IV metals, are of special fundamental and technological interest due to their important catalytic applications in many organic syntheses, including olefin polymerization and activation of small molecules. In this Chapter, the orbital nature of excited states of organometallic π-complexes, based on group IV metals in the d0 electronic configuration, is surveyed, and their photophysical characteristics are discussed. Emphasis is given to redox, photophysical, photochemical properties, and their generalization regarding extremely rare ligand-to-metal charge transfer (LMCT) excited states of group IV metallocenes, experimental quantities of the highest occupied (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied (LUMO) molecular orbitals, a trend in the HOMO-LUMO energy gap upon structural variations in the complexes. Experimental key relations Ehv ∝ ΔEredox are demonstrated for early transition metals (Ti, Zr, and Hf). Combination of photophysical and electrochemical methods provides first experimental estimate of both HOMO and LUMO relative energies and the HOMO- LUMO energy gap in organometallic π-complexes, having an early transition metal. The tendency in the observed photophysics (absorption and luminescence spectra, experimental and radiative lifetimes, and emission quantum efficiencies) in the homologous group IVB metallocenes is discussed in view of the nature of a d0 metal ion and coordination sphere of organometallic complexes. A d0 zirconocene dichloride is reported as a first group IV metal complex, possessing LMCT excited states with remarkable emission quantum yield (up to 0.4) and excited-state lifetime (in the range of microseconds) in fluid solutions at room temperature surpassing those of pure LMCT excited states, reported in up-to-date literature. A photophysical approach to estimate the orbital nature of extremely long-lived LMCT excited states and coordinative interactions of basic components of catalytic systems for polymerization (d0 bent metallocene precatalysts and unsaturated hydrocarbon substrates) are discussed. Orbital interactions between d0 bent metallocenes, unsaturated hydrocarbons, and organic solvents are rationalized in terms of microscopic (electronic and structural peculiarities), rather than macroscopic (dielectric constants, viscosity, etc.) properties of the solvent molecules. The photophysical approach is highlighted to enable studying intermolecular (including fine coordinative) interactions in homogeneous systems with catalytic concentrations of metal complexes that cannot be achieved by other conventional physico-chemical methods.
