Three-component photoinitiator systems generally include a light-absorbing photosensitizer (PS), an electron donor, and an electron acceptor. To investigate a key factors involved with visible light activated free radical polymerizations involving three-component photoinitiators and 2-ethyl-2-(hydroxymethyl)-1,3-propanediol triacrylate, we used thermodynamic feasibility and kinetic considerations to study photopolymerizations initiated with polymethine dyes as the PS. The Rehm-Weller equation was used to verify the thermodynamic feasibility for the photo-induced electron transfer reaction. The key kinetic factors for efficient visible light activated initiation process are summarized in two ways: (i) to retard back electron transfer process and recombination reaction steps and (ii) to use a secondary reaction step for consuming dye-based radical and regenerating the original PS (dye). The paper presents the short review on the influence of a second co-initiator structure on the free radical polymerization ability of photoredox pairs composed of polymethine dye cation acting as an electron acceptor and n-butyltriphenylborate anion acting as an electron donor. It is also presented a very efficient concept to raise the photoinitiators activity by introducing of a second co-initiator to the two-component photoinitiating system being the polymethine borate salts. Three-component systems, which contain a light-absorbing species (dye), an electron donor (borate salt), and a third component (N-alkoxypyridinum salt, 1,3,5-triazine derivative, N-methylpicolinium ester, heteroaromatic mercaptan or cyclic acetal), have emerged as efficient, visible light sensitive photoinitiators of free radical polymerization. It was found that three-component photoinitiating systems are more efficient than their two-component counterparts. The photochemical reactions (primary and secondary) occurring in the three-component photoinitiating system after irradiation with visible light were proposed basing on the laser flash photolysis. The primary photochemical reaction involves an electron transfer from n-butyltriphenylborate anion to an excited singlet state of the dye, followed by the reaction of the second co-initiator with the resulting dye radical to regenerate the original dye. This reaction simultaneously produces a second radical, which undergoes decomposition yielding radicals active in the initiation of free radical polymerization. The polymethine dyes are able to start a specific chain of an electron transfer reaction involving different additives, giving as a result one photon - two-radicals photochemical response. © 2011 by Nova Science Publishers, Inc. All rights reserved.
