© 2016 by Apple Academic Press, Inc. All rights reserved.Copolymers of ethylene (propylene) and 5-ethylidene-2-norbornene (ENB) containing 5-65 mol% of the cyclic comonomer units (ENB) in the main chain were synthesized by using homogeneous ansa-zirconocene catalysts of C2 symmetry. They are rac-Et(Ind)2ZrCl2 (1), rac-Et(H4Ind)2ZrCl2 (2), rac-Me2Si(Ind)2ZrCl2 (3), Me2C(Ind)2ZrCl2 (4), rac-Me2C(t-BuInd)2ZrCl2 (5), and methylaluminoxane (MAO). It is shown that the ethylidene groups of ENB do not take part in the copolymerization and the very cyclic comonomer unit bears the pendent unsaturated group. According to the obtained kinetic data (on copolymer output, the specific rate of ethylene consumption, and conversion of ENB), catalyst 1 shows the highest activity in the copolymerization of ethylene with ENB in comparison with the other catalysts used. The incorporation of ENB into copolymer chain proceeds with greater difficulty than with unsubstituted norbornene. The values of r1 are higher and the values of r2 are lower for ENB than those reported for the copolymerization of ethylene with norbornene. The introduction of t-Bu substituent into Ind-ligand of ansa-zirconocene (catalyst 5) considerably complicates the ENB insertion into the copolymer. The copolymers were characterized by FTIR, DSC, NMR, and X-ray spectroscopy as well as by the original technique of scattering with very cold neutrons having energies between 2 × 10-7 and 5 × 10-4 eV. With the growth of ENB content in the copolymer, its crystallinity, melting enthalpy, and melting temperature progressively decrease. Embedding of ENB units into the polyethylene main chain leads to a considerable increase of the Tg value and better optical transparency of the resulting material. The copolymer with 30 mol% of ENB, prepared by catalyst 1, was optically transparent in the UV and visible parts of the spectrum and had the highest Tg (83°C) and density (ρ > 1,000 kg/m3). Ozonolysis under the mild reaction conditions permits the conversion of the ethylidene groups of poly(ethylene-co-ENB)s into polar carbonyl, aliphatic carboxylic, and aldehydes side groups.
