The synthetic zeolites are characterized by a great variety of structures and compositions, as well as by the different adsorption ability to ions, clusters and the transition metal complexes. Therefore they are interesting as supports for heterogenization of the olefin polymerization catalysts. In addition the natural zeolites due to their considerable content in nature and low cost may be used as fillers for the polymer composite materials. The immobilized metalcomplex catalysts of olefin (ethylene and propylene) polymerization have been developed on the base of zeolites. In order to prepare these catalysts, the anchored aluminoxanes have been synthesized by reaction of aluminum alkyls (AlMe3, AlEt3 and AliBu3) with water contained in intracrystalline cavities and pores of zeolites (NaY, NaZSM-5, HZSM-5, NH4ZSM-5, mordenite and clinoptilolite-bearing tuff). These aluminoxanes, with zirconocenes, vanadium chlorides and other transition metals, form the heterogenized complexes that are active in the polymerization of ethylene and propylene without addition of other organoaluminum cocatalysts. The nature of zeolites used as a support, determines the content of zeolite water and affects the formation of anchored aluminoxanes and activity of immobilized catalysts. Polyolefins prepared with the immobilized on zeolites zirconocene catalysts demonstrate higher molecular mass and a wider molecular-mass distribution than those of corresponding homogeneous catalysts. The stereoselectivity of supported catalysts depends on the composition, structure of metallocenes and on the zeolite nature. The new composite materials on the base of ultrahigh-molecular-mass polyethylene UHMPE and natural zeolites were developed. The synthesis of composites was carried out by ethylene polymerization on the catalytically activated surface ofzeolite fillers. Depending on the amount of zeolite filler in the UHMPE matrix such compositions can be used as wear-resistant, impact-resistant materials for production of units working in conditions of dry friction at high loading or as organomineral ion-exchange sorbents for water purification from radionuclides and heavy metal ions. © 2012 by Nova Science Publishers, Inc. All rights reserved.
