The mechanisms of chain initiation (reaction 1) and chain propagation leading to linear and methyl-branched polymers (reactions 2 and 3, respectively) as well as chain-transfer (or chain-termination) reactions including associative displacement (reaction 4) β-H elimination (reaction 5), H exchange (reaction 6), and hydrogenolysis (reaction 7) of transition-metal-catalyzed ethylene polymerization have been compared for different metal atoms in the diimine-M(II) complexes (where M = Ni, Pd, and Pt) on one hand, and between diimine-M(II) and zirconocene complexes on the other. The rate-determining step of reactions 1 and 2 is the migratory insertion of the olefin into a metal-alkyl bond for both diimine-M(II)- and zirconocene-based catalysts. Under the same conditions, zirconocenes are slightly more active catalysts than the diimine-Ni(II) complex, with the catalytic activity of the diimine-M(II) complex decreasing as Ni > Pd > Pt. The resting stage of the process is a metal-olefin-alkyl complex, and the larger the stability of the complex, the higher the barrier height for migratory insertion. Both chain-propagation reactions, 2 and 3, start from the β-agostic intermediate. Reaction 2 for linear chain growth begins with a barrierless bimolecular reaction of coordination of the next olefin, while reaction 3 for branched growth begins as a unimolecular β-hydride-elimination reaction with an activation barrier. Higher temperatures should increase and higher ethylene pressures should decrease the branching. The barrier heights indicate that (i) the zirconocenes will produce a higher ratio of linear to methyl-branched polyethylene than the diimine-M(II) and (ii) the linear/branched ratio will be larger for the diimine-Ni(II) than its Pd analog. Among the chain-termination mechanisms studied, the associative-displacement mechanism 4 where the coordinating olefin exchanges with ethylene from solution is likely to be a preferred one for diimine-M(II)-based processes. The C-H activation and H-exchange chain-termination mechanisms, which are favorable for zirconocenes, are inefficient for diimine-M(II). Hydrogenolysis is another favorable chain-termination process for both the diimine-M(II) and zirconocene in the presence of gaseous hydrogen. © CNRS-Gauthier-Villars.
